The Project Gutenberg eBook of Martin Eden
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Martin Eden

Author: Jack London

Release date: September 1, 1997 [eBook #1056]
                Most recently updated: April 20, 2021

Language: English

Credits: David Price


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARTIN EDEN ***

[Illustration]




Martin Eden

by Jack London


Contents

 CHAPTER I. 
 CHAPTER II. 
 CHAPTER III. 
 CHAPTER IV. 
 CHAPTER V. 
 CHAPTER VI. 
 CHAPTER VII. 
 CHAPTER VIII. 
 CHAPTER IX. 
 CHAPTER X. 
 CHAPTER XI. 
 CHAPTER XII. 
 CHAPTER XIII. 
 CHAPTER XIV. 
 CHAPTER XV. 
 CHAPTER XVI. 
 CHAPTER XVII. 
 CHAPTER XVIII. 
 CHAPTER XIX. 
 CHAPTER XX. 
 CHAPTER XXI. 
 CHAPTER XXII. 
 CHAPTER XXIII. 
 CHAPTER XXIV. 
 CHAPTER XXV. 
 CHAPTER XXVI. 
 CHAPTER XXVII. 
 CHAPTER XXVIII. 
 CHAPTER XXIX. 
 CHAPTER XXX. 
 CHAPTER XXXI. 
 CHAPTER XXXII. 
 CHAPTER XXXIII. 
 CHAPTER XXXIV. 
 CHAPTER XXXV. 
 CHAPTER XXXVI. 
 CHAPTER XXXVII. 
 CHAPTER XXXVIII. 
 CHAPTER XXXIX. 
 CHAPTER XL. 
 CHAPTER XLI. 
 CHAPTER XLII. 
 CHAPTER XLIII. 
 CHAPTER XLIV. 
 CHAPTER XLV. 
 CHAPTER XLVI. 


“Let me live out my years in heat of blood!
    Let me lie drunken with the dreamer’s wine!
Let me not see this soul-house built of mud
    Go toppling to the dust a vacant shrine!”




CHAPTER I.


The one opened the door with a latch-key and went in, followed by a
young fellow who awkwardly removed his cap. He wore rough clothes that
smacked of the sea, and he was manifestly out of place in the spacious
hall in which he found himself. He did not know what to do with his
cap, and was stuffing it into his coat pocket when the other took it
from him. The act was done quietly and naturally, and the awkward young
fellow appreciated it. “He understands,” was his thought. “He’ll see me
through all right.”

He walked at the other’s heels with a swing to his shoulders, and his
legs spread unwittingly, as if the level floors were tilting up and
sinking down to the heave and lunge of the sea. The wide rooms seemed
too narrow for his rolling gait, and to himself he was in terror lest
his broad shoulders should collide with the doorways or sweep the
bric-a-brac from the low mantel. He recoiled from side to side between
the various objects and multiplied the hazards that in reality lodged
only in his mind. Between a grand piano and a centre-table piled high
with books was space for a half a dozen to walk abreast, yet he essayed
it with trepidation. His heavy arms hung loosely at his sides. He did
not know what to do with those arms and hands, and when, to his excited
vision, one arm seemed liable to brush against the books on the table,
he lurched away like a frightened horse, barely missing the piano
stool. He watched the easy walk of the other in front of him, and for
the first time realized that his walk was different from that of other
men. He experienced a momentary pang of shame that he should walk so
uncouthly. The sweat burst through the skin of his forehead in tiny
beads, and he paused and mopped his bronzed face with his handkerchief.

“Hold on, Arthur, my boy,” he said, attempting to mask his anxiety with
facetious utterance. “This is too much all at once for yours truly.
Give me a chance to get my nerve. You know I didn’t want to come, an’ I
guess your fam’ly ain’t hankerin’ to see me neither.”

“That’s all right,” was the reassuring answer. “You mustn’t be
frightened at us. We’re just homely people—Hello, there’s a letter for
me.”

He stepped back to the table, tore open the envelope, and began to
read, giving the stranger an opportunity to recover himself. And the
stranger understood and appreciated. His was the gift of sympathy,
understanding; and beneath his alarmed exterior that sympathetic
process went on. He mopped his forehead dry and glanced about him with
a controlled face, though in the eyes there was an expression such as
wild animals betray when they fear the trap. He was surrounded by the
unknown, apprehensive of what might happen, ignorant of what he should
do, aware that he walked and bore himself awkwardly, fearful that every
attribute and power of him was similarly afflicted. He was keenly
sensitive, hopelessly self-conscious, and the amused glance that the
other stole privily at him over the top of the letter burned into him
like a dagger-thrust. He saw the glance, but he gave no sign, for among
the things he had learned was discipline. Also, that dagger-thrust went
to his pride. He cursed himself for having come, and at the same time
resolved that, happen what would, having come, he would carry it
through. The lines of his face hardened, and into his eyes came a
fighting light. He looked about more unconcernedly, sharply observant,
every detail of the pretty interior registering itself on his brain.
His eyes were wide apart; nothing in their field of vision escaped; and
as they drank in the beauty before them the fighting light died out and
a warm glow took its place. He was responsive to beauty, and here was
cause to respond.

An oil painting caught and held him. A heavy surf thundered and burst
over an outjutting rock; lowering storm-clouds covered the sky; and,
outside the line of surf, a pilot-schooner, close-hauled, heeled over
till every detail of her deck was visible, was surging along against a
stormy sunset sky. There was beauty, and it drew him irresistibly. He
forgot his awkward walk and came closer to the painting, very close.
The beauty faded out of the canvas. His face expressed his
bepuzzlement. He stared at what seemed a careless daub of paint, then
stepped away. Immediately all the beauty flashed back into the canvas.
“A trick picture,” was his thought, as he dismissed it, though in the
midst of the multitudinous impressions he was receiving he found time
to feel a prod of indignation that so much beauty should be sacrificed
to make a trick. He did not know painting. He had been brought up on
chromos and lithographs that were always definite and sharp, near or
far. He had seen oil paintings, it was true, in the show windows of
shops, but the glass of the windows had prevented his eager eyes from
approaching too near.

He glanced around at his friend reading the letter and saw the books on
the table. Into his eyes leaped a wistfulness and a yearning as
promptly as the yearning leaps into the eyes of a starving man at sight
of food. An impulsive stride, with one lurch to right and left of the
shoulders, brought him to the table, where he began affectionately
handling the books. He glanced at the titles and the authors’ names,
read fragments of text, caressing the volumes with his eyes and hands,
and, once, recognized a book he had read. For the rest, they were
strange books and strange authors. He chanced upon a volume of
Swinburne and began reading steadily, forgetful of where he was, his
face glowing. Twice he closed the book on his forefinger to look at the
name of the author. Swinburne! he would remember that name. That fellow
had eyes, and he had certainly seen color and flashing light. But who
was Swinburne? Was he dead a hundred years or so, like most of the
poets? Or was he alive still, and writing? He turned to the title-page
. . . yes, he had written other books; well, he would go to the free
library the first thing in the morning and try to get hold of some of
Swinburne’s stuff. He went back to the text and lost himself. He did
not notice that a young woman had entered the room. The first he knew
was when he heard Arthur’s voice saying:-

“Ruth, this is Mr. Eden.”

The book was closed on his forefinger, and before he turned he was
thrilling to the first new impression, which was not of the girl, but
of her brother’s words. Under that muscled body of his he was a mass of
quivering sensibilities. At the slightest impact of the outside world
upon his consciousness, his thoughts, sympathies, and emotions leapt
and played like lambent flame. He was extraordinarily receptive and
responsive, while his imagination, pitched high, was ever at work
establishing relations of likeness and difference. “Mr. Eden,” was what
he had thrilled to—he who had been called “Eden,” or “Martin Eden,” or
just “Martin,” all his life. And “_Mister_!” It was certainly going
some, was his internal comment. His mind seemed to turn, on the
instant, into a vast camera obscura, and he saw arrayed around his
consciousness endless pictures from his life, of stoke-holes and
forecastles, camps and beaches, jails and boozing-kens, fever-hospitals
and slum streets, wherein the thread of association was the fashion in
which he had been addressed in those various situations.

And then he turned and saw the girl. The phantasmagoria of his brain
vanished at sight of her. She was a pale, ethereal creature, with wide,
spiritual blue eyes and a wealth of golden hair. He did not know how
she was dressed, except that the dress was as wonderful as she. He
likened her to a pale gold flower upon a slender stem. No, she was a
spirit, a divinity, a goddess; such sublimated beauty was not of the
earth. Or perhaps the books were right, and there were many such as she
in the upper walks of life. She might well be sung by that chap,
Swinburne. Perhaps he had had somebody like her in mind when he painted
that girl, Iseult, in the book there on the table. All this plethora of
sight, and feeling, and thought occurred on the instant. There was no
pause of the realities wherein he moved. He saw her hand coming out to
his, and she looked him straight in the eyes as she shook hands,
frankly, like a man. The women he had known did not shake hands that
way. For that matter, most of them did not shake hands at all. A flood
of associations, visions of various ways he had made the acquaintance
of women, rushed into his mind and threatened to swamp it. But he shook
them aside and looked at her. Never had he seen such a woman. The women
he had known! Immediately, beside her, on either hand, ranged the women
he had known. For an eternal second he stood in the midst of a portrait
gallery, wherein she occupied the central place, while about her were
limned many women, all to be weighed and measured by a fleeting glance,
herself the unit of weight and measure. He saw the weak and sickly
faces of the girls of the factories, and the simpering, boisterous
girls from the south of Market. There were women of the cattle camps,
and swarthy cigarette-smoking women of Old Mexico. These, in turn, were
crowded out by Japanese women, doll-like, stepping mincingly on wooden
clogs; by Eurasians, delicate featured, stamped with degeneracy; by
full-bodied South-Sea-Island women, flower-crowned and brown-skinned.
All these were blotted out by a grotesque and terrible nightmare
brood—frowsy, shuffling creatures from the pavements of Whitechapel,
gin-bloated hags of the stews, and all the vast hell’s following of
harpies, vile-mouthed and filthy, that under the guise of monstrous
female form prey upon sailors, the scrapings of the ports, the scum and
slime of the human pit.

“Won’t you sit down, Mr. Eden?” the girl was saying. “I have been
looking forward to meeting you ever since Arthur told us. It was brave
of you—”

He waved his hand deprecatingly and muttered that it was nothing at
all, what he had done, and that any fellow would have done it. She
noticed that the hand he waved was covered with fresh abrasions, in the
process of healing, and a glance at the other loose-hanging hand showed
it to be in the same condition. Also, with quick, critical eye, she
noted a scar on his cheek, another that peeped out from under the hair
of the forehead, and a third that ran down and disappeared under the
starched collar. She repressed a smile at sight of the red line that
marked the chafe of the collar against the bronzed neck. He was
evidently unused to stiff collars. Likewise her feminine eye took in
the clothes he wore, the cheap and unaesthetic cut, the wrinkling of
the coat across the shoulders, and the series of wrinkles in the
sleeves that advertised bulging biceps muscles.

While he waved his hand and muttered that he had done nothing at all,
he was obeying her behest by trying to get into a chair. He found time
to admire the ease with which she sat down, then lurched toward a chair
facing her, overwhelmed with consciousness of the awkward figure he was
cutting. This was a new experience for him. All his life, up to then,
he had been unaware of being either graceful or awkward. Such thoughts
of self had never entered his mind. He sat down gingerly on the edge of
the chair, greatly worried by his hands. They were in the way wherever
he put them. Arthur was leaving the room, and Martin Eden followed his
exit with longing eyes. He felt lost, alone there in the room with that
pale spirit of a woman. There was no bar-keeper upon whom to call for
drinks, no small boy to send around the corner for a can of beer and by
means of that social fluid start the amenities of friendship flowing.

“You have such a scar on your neck, Mr. Eden,” the girl was saying.
“How did it happen? I am sure it must have been some adventure.”

“A Mexican with a knife, miss,” he answered, moistening his parched
lips and clearing his throat. “It was just a fight. After I got the
knife away, he tried to bite off my nose.”

Baldly as he had stated it, in his eyes was a rich vision of that hot,
starry night at Salina Cruz, the white strip of beach, the lights of
the sugar steamers in the harbor, the voices of the drunken sailors in
the distance, the jostling stevedores, the flaming passion in the
Mexican’s face, the glint of the beast-eyes in the starlight, the sting
of the steel in his neck, and the rush of blood, the crowd and the
cries, the two bodies, his and the Mexican’s, locked together, rolling
over and over and tearing up the sand, and from away off somewhere the
mellow tinkling of a guitar. Such was the picture, and he thrilled to
the memory of it, wondering if the man could paint it who had painted
the pilot-schooner on the wall. The white beach, the stars, and the
lights of the sugar steamers would look great, he thought, and midway
on the sand the dark group of figures that surrounded the fighters. The
knife occupied a place in the picture, he decided, and would show well,
with a sort of gleam, in the light of the stars. But of all this no
hint had crept into his speech. “He tried to bite off my nose,” he
concluded.

“Oh,” the girl said, in a faint, far voice, and he noticed the shock in
her sensitive face.

He felt a shock himself, and a blush of embarrassment shone faintly on
his sunburned cheeks, though to him it burned as hotly as when his
cheeks had been exposed to the open furnace-door in the fire-room. Such
sordid things as stabbing affrays were evidently not fit subjects for
conversation with a lady. People in the books, in her walk of life, did
not talk about such things—perhaps they did not know about them,
either.

There was a brief pause in the conversation they were trying to get
started. Then she asked tentatively about the scar on his cheek. Even
as she asked, he realized that she was making an effort to talk his
talk, and he resolved to get away from it and talk hers.

“It was just an accident,” he said, putting his hand to his cheek. “One
night, in a calm, with a heavy sea running, the main-boom-lift carried
away, an’ next the tackle. The lift was wire, an’ it was threshin’
around like a snake. The whole watch was tryin’ to grab it, an’ I
rushed in an’ got swatted.”

“Oh,” she said, this time with an accent of comprehension, though
secretly his speech had been so much Greek to her and she was wondering
what a _lift_ was and what _swatted_ meant.

“This man Swineburne,” he began, attempting to put his plan into
execution and pronouncing the _i_ long.

“Who?”

“Swineburne,” he repeated, with the same mispronunciation. “The poet.”

“Swinburne,” she corrected.

“Yes, that’s the chap,” he stammered, his cheeks hot again. “How long
since he died?”

“Why, I haven’t heard that he was dead.” She looked at him curiously.
“Where did you make his acquaintance?”

“I never clapped eyes on him,” was the reply. “But I read some of his
poetry out of that book there on the table just before you come in. How
do you like his poetry?”

And thereat she began to talk quickly and easily upon the subject he
had suggested. He felt better, and settled back slightly from the edge
of the chair, holding tightly to its arms with his hands, as if it
might get away from him and buck him to the floor. He had succeeded in
making her talk her talk, and while she rattled on, he strove to follow
her, marvelling at all the knowledge that was stowed away in that
pretty head of hers, and drinking in the pale beauty of her face.
Follow her he did, though bothered by unfamiliar words that fell glibly
from her lips and by critical phrases and thought-processes that were
foreign to his mind, but that nevertheless stimulated his mind and set
it tingling. Here was intellectual life, he thought, and here was
beauty, warm and wonderful as he had never dreamed it could be. He
forgot himself and stared at her with hungry eyes. Here was something
to live for, to win to, to fight for—ay, and die for. The books were
true. There were such women in the world. She was one of them. She lent
wings to his imagination, and great, luminous canvases spread
themselves before him whereon loomed vague, gigantic figures of love
and romance, and of heroic deeds for woman’s sake—for a pale woman, a
flower of gold. And through the swaying, palpitant vision, as through a
fairy mirage, he stared at the real woman, sitting there and talking of
literature and art. He listened as well, but he stared, unconscious of
the fixity of his gaze or of the fact that all that was essentially
masculine in his nature was shining in his eyes. But she, who knew
little of the world of men, being a woman, was keenly aware of his
burning eyes. She had never had men look at her in such fashion, and it
embarrassed her. She stumbled and halted in her utterance. The thread
of argument slipped from her. He frightened her, and at the same time
it was strangely pleasant to be so looked upon. Her training warned her
of peril and of wrong, subtle, mysterious, luring; while her instincts
rang clarion-voiced through her being, impelling her to hurdle caste
and place and gain to this traveller from another world, to this
uncouth young fellow with lacerated hands and a line of raw red caused
by the unaccustomed linen at his throat, who, all too evidently, was
soiled and tainted by ungracious existence. She was clean, and her
cleanness revolted; but she was woman, and she was just beginning to
learn the paradox of woman.

“As I was saying—what was I saying?” She broke off abruptly and laughed
merrily at her predicament.

“You was saying that this man Swinburne failed bein’ a great poet
because—an’ that was as far as you got, miss,” he prompted, while to
himself he seemed suddenly hungry, and delicious little thrills crawled
up and down his spine at the sound of her laughter. Like silver, he
thought to himself, like tinkling silver bells; and on the instant, and
for an instant, he was transported to a far land, where under pink
cherry blossoms, he smoked a cigarette and listened to the bells of the
peaked pagoda calling straw-sandalled devotees to worship.

“Yes, thank you,” she said. “Swinburne fails, when all is said, because
he is, well, indelicate. There are many of his poems that should never
be read. Every line of the really great poets is filled with beautiful
truth, and calls to all that is high and noble in the human. Not a line
of the great poets can be spared without impoverishing the world by
that much.”

“I thought it was great,” he said hesitatingly, “the little I read. I
had no idea he was such a—a scoundrel. I guess that crops out in his
other books.”

“There are many lines that could be spared from the book you were
reading,” she said, her voice primly firm and dogmatic.

“I must ’a’ missed ’em,” he announced. “What I read was the real goods.
It was all lighted up an’ shining, an’ it shun right into me an’
lighted me up inside, like the sun or a searchlight. That’s the way it
landed on me, but I guess I ain’t up much on poetry, miss.”

He broke off lamely. He was confused, painfully conscious of his
inarticulateness. He had felt the bigness and glow of life in what he
had read, but his speech was inadequate. He could not express what he
felt, and to himself he likened himself to a sailor, in a strange ship,
on a dark night, groping about in the unfamiliar running rigging. Well,
he decided, it was up to him to get acquainted in this new world. He
had never seen anything that he couldn’t get the hang of when he wanted
to and it was about time for him to want to learn to talk the things
that were inside of him so that she could understand. _She_ was bulking
large on his horizon.

“Now Longfellow—” she was saying.

“Yes, I’ve read ’m,” he broke in impulsively, spurred on to exhibit and
make the most of his little store of book knowledge, desirous of
showing her that he was not wholly a stupid clod. “‘The Psalm of Life,’
‘Excelsior,’ an’ . . . I guess that’s all.”

She nodded her head and smiled, and he felt, somehow, that her smile
was tolerant, pitifully tolerant. He was a fool to attempt to make a
pretence that way. That Longfellow chap most likely had written
countless books of poetry.

“Excuse me, miss, for buttin’ in that way. I guess the real facts is
that I don’t know nothin’ much about such things. It ain’t in my class.
But I’m goin’ to make it in my class.”

It sounded like a threat. His voice was determined, his eyes were
flashing, the lines of his face had grown harsh. And to her it seemed
that the angle of his jaw had changed; its pitch had become
unpleasantly aggressive. At the same time a wave of intense virility
seemed to surge out from him and impinge upon her.

“I think you could make it in—in your class,” she finished with a
laugh. “You are very strong.”

Her gaze rested for a moment on the muscular neck, heavy corded, almost
bull-like, bronzed by the sun, spilling over with rugged health and
strength. And though he sat there, blushing and humble, again she felt
drawn to him. She was surprised by a wanton thought that rushed into
her mind. It seemed to her that if she could lay her two hands upon
that neck that all its strength and vigor would flow out to her. She
was shocked by this thought. It seemed to reveal to her an undreamed
depravity in her nature. Besides, strength to her was a gross and
brutish thing. Her ideal of masculine beauty had always been slender
gracefulness. Yet the thought still persisted. It bewildered her that
she should desire to place her hands on that sunburned neck. In truth,
she was far from robust, and the need of her body and mind was for
strength. But she did not know it. She knew only that no man had ever
affected her before as this one had, who shocked her from moment to
moment with his awful grammar.

“Yes, I ain’t no invalid,” he said. “When it comes down to hard-pan, I
can digest scrap-iron. But just now I’ve got dyspepsia. Most of what
you was sayin’ I can’t digest. Never trained that way, you see. I like
books and poetry, and what time I’ve had I’ve read ’em, but I’ve never
thought about ’em the way you have. That’s why I can’t talk about ’em.
I’m like a navigator adrift on a strange sea without chart or compass.
Now I want to get my bearin’s. Mebbe you can put me right. How did you
learn all this you’ve ben talkin’?”

“By going to school, I fancy, and by studying,” she answered.

“I went to school when I was a kid,” he began to object.

“Yes; but I mean high school, and lectures, and the university.”

“You’ve gone to the university?” he demanded in frank amazement. He
felt that she had become remoter from him by at least a million miles.

“I’m going there now. I’m taking special courses in English.”

He did not know what “English” meant, but he made a mental note of that
item of ignorance and passed on.

“How long would I have to study before I could go to the university?”
he asked.

She beamed encouragement upon his desire for knowledge, and said: “That
depends upon how much studying you have already done. You have never
attended high school? Of course not. But did you finish grammar
school?”

“I had two years to run, when I left,” he answered. “But I was always
honorably promoted at school.”

The next moment, angry with himself for the boast, he had gripped the
arms of the chair so savagely that every finger-end was stinging. At
the same moment he became aware that a woman was entering the room. He
saw the girl leave her chair and trip swiftly across the floor to the
newcomer. They kissed each other, and, with arms around each other’s
waists, they advanced toward him. That must be her mother, he thought.
She was a tall, blond woman, slender, and stately, and beautiful. Her
gown was what he might expect in such a house. His eyes delighted in
the graceful lines of it. She and her dress together reminded him of
women on the stage. Then he remembered seeing similar grand ladies and
gowns entering the London theatres while he stood and watched and the
policemen shoved him back into the drizzle beyond the awning. Next his
mind leaped to the Grand Hotel at Yokohama, where, too, from the
sidewalk, he had seen grand ladies. Then the city and the harbor of
Yokohama, in a thousand pictures, began flashing before his eyes. But
he swiftly dismissed the kaleidoscope of memory, oppressed by the
urgent need of the present. He knew that he must stand up to be
introduced, and he struggled painfully to his feet, where he stood with
trousers bagging at the knees, his arms loose-hanging and ludicrous,
his face set hard for the impending ordeal.




CHAPTER II.


The process of getting into the dining room was a nightmare to him.
Between halts and stumbles, jerks and lurches, locomotion had at times
seemed impossible. But at last he had made it, and was seated alongside
of Her. The array of knives and forks frightened him. They bristled
with unknown perils, and he gazed at them, fascinated, till their
dazzle became a background across which moved a succession of
forecastle pictures, wherein he and his mates sat eating salt beef with
sheath-knives and fingers, or scooping thick pea-soup out of pannikins
by means of battered iron spoons. The stench of bad beef was in his
nostrils, while in his ears, to the accompaniment of creaking timbers
and groaning bulkheads, echoed the loud mouth-noises of the eaters. He
watched them eating, and decided that they ate like pigs. Well, he
would be careful here. He would make no noise. He would keep his mind
upon it all the time.

He glanced around the table. Opposite him was Arthur, and Arthur’s
brother, Norman. They were her brothers, he reminded himself, and his
heart warmed toward them. How they loved each other, the members of
this family! There flashed into his mind the picture of her mother, of
the kiss of greeting, and of the pair of them walking toward him with
arms entwined. Not in his world were such displays of affection between
parents and children made. It was a revelation of the heights of
existence that were attained in the world above. It was the finest
thing yet that he had seen in this small glimpse of that world. He was
moved deeply by appreciation of it, and his heart was melting with
sympathetic tenderness. He had starved for love all his life. His
nature craved love. It was an organic demand of his being. Yet he had
gone without, and hardened himself in the process. He had not known
that he needed love. Nor did he know it now. He merely saw it in
operation, and thrilled to it, and thought it fine, and high, and
splendid.

He was glad that Mr. Morse was not there. It was difficult enough
getting acquainted with her, and her mother, and her brother, Norman.
Arthur he already knew somewhat. The father would have been too much
for him, he felt sure. It seemed to him that he had never worked so
hard in his life. The severest toil was child’s play compared with
this. Tiny nodules of moisture stood out on his forehead, and his shirt
was wet with sweat from the exertion of doing so many unaccustomed
things at once. He had to eat as he had never eaten before, to handle
strange tools, to glance surreptitiously about and learn how to
accomplish each new thing, to receive the flood of impressions that was
pouring in upon him and being mentally annotated and classified; to be
conscious of a yearning for her that perturbed him in the form of a
dull, aching restlessness; to feel the prod of desire to win to the
walk in life whereon she trod, and to have his mind ever and again
straying off in speculation and vague plans of how to reach to her.
Also, when his secret glance went across to Norman opposite him, or to
any one else, to ascertain just what knife or fork was to be used in
any particular occasion, that person’s features were seized upon by his
mind, which automatically strove to appraise them and to divine what
they were—all in relation to her. Then he had to talk, to hear what was
said to him and what was said back and forth, and to answer, when it
was necessary, with a tongue prone to looseness of speech that required
a constant curb. And to add confusion to confusion, there was the
servant, an unceasing menace, that appeared noiselessly at his
shoulder, a dire Sphinx that propounded puzzles and conundrums
demanding instantaneous solution. He was oppressed throughout the meal
by the thought of finger-bowls. Irrelevantly, insistently, scores of
times, he wondered when they would come on and what they looked like.
He had heard of such things, and now, sooner or later, somewhere in the
next few minutes, he would see them, sit at table with exalted beings
who used them—ay, and he would use them himself. And most important of
all, far down and yet always at the surface of his thought, was the
problem of how he should comport himself toward these persons. What
should his attitude be? He wrestled continually and anxiously with the
problem. There were cowardly suggestions that he should make believe,
assume a part; and there were still more cowardly suggestions that
warned him he would fail in such course, that his nature was not fitted
to live up to it, and that he would make a fool of himself.

It was during the first part of the dinner, struggling to decide upon
his attitude, that he was very quiet. He did not know that his
quietness was giving the lie to Arthur’s words of the day before, when
that brother of hers had announced that he was going to bring a wild
man home to dinner and for them not to be alarmed, because they would
find him an interesting wild man. Martin Eden could not have found it
in him, just then, to believe that her brother could be guilty of such
treachery—especially when he had been the means of getting this
particular brother out of an unpleasant row. So he sat at table,
perturbed by his own unfitness and at the same time charmed by all that
went on about him. For the first time he realized that eating was
something more than a utilitarian function. He was unaware of what he
ate. It was merely food. He was feasting his love of beauty at this
table where eating was an aesthetic function. It was an intellectual
function, too. His mind was stirred. He heard words spoken that were
meaningless to him, and other words that he had seen only in books and
that no man or woman he had known was of large enough mental caliber to
pronounce. When he heard such words dropping carelessly from the lips
of the members of this marvellous family, her family, he thrilled with
delight. The romance, and beauty, and high vigor of the books were
coming true. He was in that rare and blissful state wherein a man sees
his dreams stalk out from the crannies of fantasy and become fact.

Never had he been at such an altitude of living, and he kept himself in
the background, listening, observing, and pleasuring, replying in
reticent monosyllables, saying, “Yes, miss,” and “No, miss,” to her,
and “Yes, ma’am,” and “No, ma’am,” to her mother. He curbed the
impulse, arising out of his sea-training, to say “Yes, sir,” and “No,
sir,” to her brothers. He felt that it would be inappropriate and a
confession of inferiority on his part—which would never do if he was to
win to her. Also, it was a dictate of his pride. “By God!” he cried to
himself, once; “I’m just as good as them, and if they do know lots that
I don’t, I could learn ’m a few myself, all the same!” And the next
moment, when she or her mother addressed him as “Mr. Eden,” his
aggressive pride was forgotten, and he was glowing and warm with
delight. He was a civilized man, that was what he was, shoulder to
shoulder, at dinner, with people he had read about in books. He was in
the books himself, adventuring through the printed pages of bound
volumes.

But while he belied Arthur’s description, and appeared a gentle lamb
rather than a wild man, he was racking his brains for a course of
action. He was no gentle lamb, and the part of second fiddle would
never do for the high-pitched dominance of his nature. He talked only
when he had to, and then his speech was like his walk to the table,
filled with jerks and halts as he groped in his polyglot vocabulary for
words, debating over words he knew were fit but which he feared he
could not pronounce, rejecting other words he knew would not be
understood or would be raw and harsh. But all the time he was oppressed
by the consciousness that this carefulness of diction was making a
booby of him, preventing him from expressing what he had in him. Also,
his love of freedom chafed against the restriction in much the same way
his neck chafed against the starched fetter of a collar. Besides, he
was confident that he could not keep it up. He was by nature powerful
of thought and sensibility, and the creative spirit was restive and
urgent. He was swiftly mastered by the concept or sensation in him that
struggled in birth-throes to receive expression and form, and then he
forgot himself and where he was, and the old words—the tools of speech
he knew—slipped out.

Once, he declined something from the servant who interrupted and
pestered at his shoulder, and he said, shortly and emphatically, “Pow!”

On the instant those at the table were keyed up and expectant, the
servant was smugly pleased, and he was wallowing in mortification. But
he recovered himself quickly.

“It’s the Kanaka for ‘finish,’” he explained, “and it just come out
naturally. It’s spelt p-a-u.”

He caught her curious and speculative eyes fixed on his hands, and,
being in explanatory mood, he said:-

“I just come down the Coast on one of the Pacific mail steamers. She
was behind time, an’ around the Puget Sound ports we worked like
niggers, storing cargo—mixed freight, if you know what that means.
That’s how the skin got knocked off.”

“Oh, it wasn’t that,” she hastened to explain, in turn. “Your hands
seemed too small for your body.”

His cheeks were hot. He took it as an exposure of another of his
deficiencies.

“Yes,” he said depreciatingly. “They ain’t big enough to stand the
strain. I can hit like a mule with my arms and shoulders. They are too
strong, an’ when I smash a man on the jaw the hands get smashed, too.”

He was not happy at what he had said. He was filled with disgust at
himself. He had loosed the guard upon his tongue and talked about
things that were not nice.

“It was brave of you to help Arthur the way you did—and you a
stranger,” she said tactfully, aware of his discomfiture though not of
the reason for it.

He, in turn, realized what she had done, and in the consequent warm
surge of gratefulness that overwhelmed him forgot his loose-worded
tongue.

“It wasn’t nothin’ at all,” he said. “Any guy ’ud do it for another.
That bunch of hoodlums was lookin’ for trouble, an’ Arthur wasn’t
botherin’ ’em none. They butted in on ’m, an’ then I butted in on them
an’ poked a few. That’s where some of the skin off my hands went, along
with some of the teeth of the gang. I wouldn’t ’a’ missed it for
anything. When I seen—”

He paused, open-mouthed, on the verge of the pit of his own depravity
and utter worthlessness to breathe the same air she did. And while
Arthur took up the tale, for the twentieth time, of his adventure with
the drunken hoodlums on the ferry-boat and of how Martin Eden had
rushed in and rescued him, that individual, with frowning brows,
meditated upon the fool he had made of himself, and wrestled more
determinedly with the problem of how he should conduct himself toward
these people. He certainly had not succeeded so far. He wasn’t of their
tribe, and he couldn’t talk their lingo, was the way he put it to
himself. He couldn’t fake being their kind. The masquerade would fail,
and besides, masquerade was foreign to his nature. There was no room in
him for sham or artifice. Whatever happened, he must be real. He
couldn’t talk their talk just yet, though in time he would. Upon that
he was resolved. But in the meantime, talk he must, and it must be his
own talk, toned down, of course, so as to be comprehensible to them and
so as not to shock them too much. And furthermore, he wouldn’t claim,
not even by tacit acceptance, to be familiar with anything that was
unfamiliar. In pursuance of this decision, when the two brothers,
talking university shop, had used “trig” several times, Martin Eden
demanded:-

“What is _trig_?”

“Trignometry,” Norman said; “a higher form of math.”

“And what is math?” was the next question, which, somehow, brought the
laugh on Norman.

“Mathematics, arithmetic,” was the answer.

Martin Eden nodded. He had caught a glimpse of the apparently
illimitable vistas of knowledge. What he saw took on tangibility. His
abnormal power of vision made abstractions take on concrete form. In
the alchemy of his brain, trigonometry and mathematics and the whole
field of knowledge which they betokened were transmuted into so much
landscape. The vistas he saw were vistas of green foliage and forest
glades, all softly luminous or shot through with flashing lights. In
the distance, detail was veiled and blurred by a purple haze, but
behind this purple haze, he knew, was the glamour of the unknown, the
lure of romance. It was like wine to him. Here was adventure, something
to do with head and hand, a world to conquer—and straightway from the
back of his consciousness rushed the thought, _conquering, to win to
her, that lily-pale spirit sitting beside him_.

The glimmering vision was rent asunder and dissipated by Arthur, who,
all evening, had been trying to draw his wild man out. Martin Eden
remembered his decision. For the first time he became himself,
consciously and deliberately at first, but soon lost in the joy of
creating in making life as he knew it appear before his listeners’
eyes. He had been a member of the crew of the smuggling schooner
_Halcyon_ when she was captured by a revenue cutter. He saw with wide
eyes, and he could tell what he saw. He brought the pulsing sea before
them, and the men and the ships upon the sea. He communicated his power
of vision, till they saw with his eyes what he had seen. He selected
from the vast mass of detail with an artist’s touch, drawing pictures
of life that glowed and burned with light and color, injecting movement
so that his listeners surged along with him on the flood of rough
eloquence, enthusiasm, and power. At times he shocked them with the
vividness of the narrative and his terms of speech, but beauty always
followed fast upon the heels of violence, and tragedy was relieved by
humor, by interpretations of the strange twists and quirks of sailors’
minds.

And while he talked, the girl looked at him with startled eyes. His
fire warmed her. She wondered if she had been cold all her days. She
wanted to lean toward this burning, blazing man that was like a volcano
spouting forth strength, robustness, and health. She felt that she must
lean toward him, and resisted by an effort. Then, too, there was the
counter impulse to shrink away from him. She was repelled by those
lacerated hands, grimed by toil so that the very dirt of life was
ingrained in the flesh itself, by that red chafe of the collar and
those bulging muscles. His roughness frightened her; each roughness of
speech was an insult to her ear, each rough phase of his life an insult
to her soul. And ever and again would come the draw of him, till she
thought he must be evil to have such power over her. All that was most
firmly established in her mind was rocking. His romance and adventure
were battering at the conventions. Before his facile perils and ready
laugh, life was no longer an affair of serious effort and restraint,
but a toy, to be played with and turned topsy-turvy, carelessly to be
lived and pleasured in, and carelessly to be flung aside. “Therefore,
play!” was the cry that rang through her. “Lean toward him, if so you
will, and place your two hands upon his neck!” She wanted to cry out at
the recklessness of the thought, and in vain she appraised her own
cleanness and culture and balanced all that she was against what he was
not. She glanced about her and saw the others gazing at him with rapt
attention; and she would have despaired had not she seen horror in her
mother’s eyes—fascinated horror, it was true, but none the less horror.
This man from outer darkness was evil. Her mother saw it, and her
mother was right. She would trust her mother’s judgment in this as she
had always trusted it in all things. The fire of him was no longer
warm, and the fear of him was no longer poignant.

Later, at the piano, she played for him, and at him, aggressively, with
the vague intent of emphasizing the impassableness of the gulf that
separated them. Her music was a club that she swung brutally upon his
head; and though it stunned him and crushed him down, it incited him.
He gazed upon her in awe. In his mind, as in her own, the gulf widened;
but faster than it widened, towered his ambition to win across it. But
he was too complicated a plexus of sensibilities to sit staring at a
gulf a whole evening, especially when there was music. He was
remarkably susceptible to music. It was like strong drink, firing him
to audacities of feeling,—a drug that laid hold of his imagination and
went cloud-soaring through the sky. It banished sordid fact, flooded
his mind with beauty, loosed romance and to its heels added wings. He
did not understand the music she played. It was different from the
dance-hall piano-banging and blatant brass bands he had heard. But he
had caught hints of such music from the books, and he accepted her
playing largely on faith, patiently waiting, at first, for the lilting
measures of pronounced and simple rhythm, puzzled because those
measures were not long continued. Just as he caught the swing of them
and started, his imagination attuned in flight, always they vanished
away in a chaotic scramble of sounds that was meaningless to him, and
that dropped his imagination, an inert weight, back to earth.

Once, it entered his mind that there was a deliberate rebuff in all
this. He caught her spirit of antagonism and strove to divine the
message that her hands pronounced upon the keys. Then he dismissed the
thought as unworthy and impossible, and yielded himself more freely to
the music. The old delightful condition began to be induced. His feet
were no longer clay, and his flesh became spirit; before his eyes and
behind his eyes shone a great glory; and then the scene before him
vanished and he was away, rocking over the world that was to him a very
dear world. The known and the unknown were commingled in the
dream-pageant that thronged his vision. He entered strange ports of
sun-washed lands, and trod market-places among barbaric peoples that no
man had ever seen. The scent of the spice islands was in his nostrils
as he had known it on warm, breathless nights at sea, or he beat up
against the southeast trades through long tropic days, sinking
palm-tufted coral islets in the turquoise sea behind and lifting
palm-tufted coral islets in the turquoise sea ahead. Swift as thought
the pictures came and went. One instant he was astride a broncho and
flying through the fairy-colored Painted Desert country; the next
instant he was gazing down through shimmering heat into the whited
sepulchre of Death Valley, or pulling an oar on a freezing ocean where
great ice islands towered and glistened in the sun. He lay on a coral
beach where the cocoanuts grew down to the mellow-sounding surf. The
hulk of an ancient wreck burned with blue fires, in the light of which
danced the _hula_ dancers to the barbaric love-calls of the singers,
who chanted to tinkling _ukuleles_ and rumbling tom-toms. It was a
sensuous, tropic night. In the background a volcano crater was
silhouetted against the stars. Overhead drifted a pale crescent moon,
and the Southern Cross burned low in the sky.

He was a harp; all life that he had known and that was his
consciousness was the strings; and the flood of music was a wind that
poured against those strings and set them vibrating with memories and
dreams. He did not merely feel. Sensation invested itself in form and
color and radiance, and what his imagination dared, it objectified in
some sublimated and magic way. Past, present, and future mingled; and
he went on oscillating across the broad, warm world, through high
adventure and noble deeds to Her—ay, and with her, winning her, his arm
about her, and carrying her on in flight through the empery of his
mind.

And she, glancing at him across her shoulder, saw something of all this
in his face. It was a transfigured face, with great shining eyes that
gazed beyond the veil of sound and saw behind it the leap and pulse of
life and the gigantic phantoms of the spirit. She was startled. The
raw, stumbling lout was gone. The ill-fitting clothes, battered hands,
and sunburned face remained; but these seemed the prison-bars through
which she saw a great soul looking forth, inarticulate and dumb because
of those feeble lips that would not give it speech. Only for a flashing
moment did she see this, then she saw the lout returned, and she
laughed at the whim of her fancy. But the impression of that fleeting
glimpse lingered, and when the time came for him to beat a stumbling
retreat and go, she lent him the volume of Swinburne, and another of
Browning—she was studying Browning in one of her English courses. He
seemed such a boy, as he stood blushing and stammering his thanks, that
a wave of pity, maternal in its prompting, welled up in her. She did
not remember the lout, nor the imprisoned soul, nor the man who had
stared at her in all masculineness and delighted and frightened her.
She saw before her only a boy, who was shaking her hand with a hand so
calloused that it felt like a nutmeg-grater and rasped her skin, and
who was saying jerkily:-

“The greatest time of my life. You see, I ain’t used to things. . . ”
He looked about him helplessly. “To people and houses like this. It’s
all new to me, and I like it.”

“I hope you’ll call again,” she said, as he was saying good night to
her brothers.

He pulled on his cap, lurched desperately through the doorway, and was
gone.

“Well, what do you think of him?” Arthur demanded.

“He is most interesting, a whiff of ozone,” she answered. “How old is
he?”

“Twenty—almost twenty-one. I asked him this afternoon. I didn’t think
he was that young.”

And I am three years older, was the thought in her mind as she kissed
her brothers goodnight.




CHAPTER III.


As Martin Eden went down the steps, his hand dropped into his coat
pocket. It came out with a brown rice paper and a pinch of Mexican
tobacco, which were deftly rolled together into a cigarette. He drew
the first whiff of smoke deep into his lungs and expelled it in a long
and lingering exhalation. “By God!” he said aloud, in a voice of awe
and wonder. “By God!” he repeated. And yet again he murmured, “By God!”
Then his hand went to his collar, which he ripped out of the shirt and
stuffed into his pocket. A cold drizzle was falling, but he bared his
head to it and unbuttoned his vest, swinging along in splendid
unconcern. He was only dimly aware that it was raining. He was in an
ecstasy, dreaming dreams and reconstructing the scenes just past.

He had met the woman at last—the woman that he had thought little
about, not being given to thinking about women, but whom he had
expected, in a remote way, he would sometime meet. He had sat next to
her at table. He had felt her hand in his, he had looked into her eyes
and caught a vision of a beautiful spirit;—but no more beautiful than
the eyes through which it shone, nor than the flesh that gave it
expression and form. He did not think of her flesh as flesh,—which was
new to him; for of the women he had known that was the only way he
thought. Her flesh was somehow different. He did not conceive of her
body as a body, subject to the ills and frailties of bodies. Her body
was more than the garb of her spirit. It was an emanation of her
spirit, a pure and gracious crystallization of her divine essence. This
feeling of the divine startled him. It shocked him from his dreams to
sober thought. No word, no clew, no hint, of the divine had ever
reached him before. He had never believed in the divine. He had always
been irreligious, scoffing good-naturedly at the sky-pilots and their
immortality of the soul. There was no life beyond, he had contended; it
was here and now, then darkness everlasting. But what he had seen in
her eyes was soul—immortal soul that could never die. No man he had
known, nor any woman, had given him the message of immortality. But she
had. She had whispered it to him the first moment she looked at him.
Her face shimmered before his eyes as he walked along,—pale and
serious, sweet and sensitive, smiling with pity and tenderness as only
a spirit could smile, and pure as he had never dreamed purity could be.
Her purity smote him like a blow. It startled him. He had known good
and bad; but purity, as an attribute of existence, had never entered
his mind. And now, in her, he conceived purity to be the superlative of
goodness and of cleanness, the sum of which constituted eternal life.

And promptly urged his ambition to grasp at eternal life. He was not
fit to carry water for her—he knew that; it was a miracle of luck and a
fantastic stroke that had enabled him to see her and be with her and
talk with her that night. It was accidental. There was no merit in it.
He did not deserve such fortune. His mood was essentially religious. He
was humble and meek, filled with self-disparagement and abasement. In
such frame of mind sinners come to the penitent form. He was convicted
of sin. But as the meek and lowly at the penitent form catch splendid
glimpses of their future lordly existence, so did he catch similar
glimpses of the state he would gain to by possessing her. But this
possession of her was dim and nebulous and totally different from
possession as he had known it. Ambition soared on mad wings, and he saw
himself climbing the heights with her, sharing thoughts with her,
pleasuring in beautiful and noble things with her. It was a
soul-possession he dreamed, refined beyond any grossness, a free
comradeship of spirit that he could not put into definite thought. He
did not think it. For that matter, he did not think at all. Sensation
usurped reason, and he was quivering and palpitant with emotions he had
never known, drifting deliciously on a sea of sensibility where feeling
itself was exalted and spiritualized and carried beyond the summits of
life.

He staggered along like a drunken man, murmuring fervently aloud: “By
God! By God!”

A policeman on a street corner eyed him suspiciously, then noted his
sailor roll.

“Where did you get it?” the policeman demanded.

Martin Eden came back to earth. His was a fluid organism, swiftly
adjustable, capable of flowing into and filling all sorts of nooks and
crannies. With the policeman’s hail he was immediately his ordinary
self, grasping the situation clearly.

“It’s a beaut, ain’t it?” he laughed back. “I didn’t know I was talkin’
out loud.”

“You’ll be singing next,” was the policeman’s diagnosis.

“No, I won’t. Gimme a match an’ I’ll catch the next car home.”

He lighted his cigarette, said good night, and went on. “Now wouldn’t
that rattle you?” he ejaculated under his breath. “That copper thought
I was drunk.” He smiled to himself and meditated. “I guess I was,” he
added; “but I didn’t think a woman’s face’d do it.”

He caught a Telegraph Avenue car that was going to Berkeley. It was
crowded with youths and young men who were singing songs and ever and
again barking out college yells. He studied them curiously. They were
university boys. They went to the same university that she did, were in
her class socially, could know her, could see her every day if they
wanted to. He wondered that they did not want to, that they had been
out having a good time instead of being with her that evening, talking
with her, sitting around her in a worshipful and adoring circle. His
thoughts wandered on. He noticed one with narrow-slitted eyes and a
loose-lipped mouth. That fellow was vicious, he decided. On shipboard
he would be a sneak, a whiner, a tattler. He, Martin Eden, was a better
man than that fellow. The thought cheered him. It seemed to draw him
nearer to Her. He began comparing himself with the students. He grew
conscious of the muscled mechanism of his body and felt confident that
he was physically their master. But their heads were filled with
knowledge that enabled them to talk her talk,—the thought depressed
him. But what was a brain for? he demanded passionately. What they had
done, he could do. They had been studying about life from the books
while he had been busy living life. His brain was just as full of
knowledge as theirs, though it was a different kind of knowledge. How
many of them could tie a lanyard knot, or take a wheel or a lookout?
His life spread out before him in a series of pictures of danger and
daring, hardship and toil. He remembered his failures and scrapes in
the process of learning. He was that much to the good, anyway. Later on
they would have to begin living life and going through the mill as he
had gone. Very well. While they were busy with that, he could be
learning the other side of life from the books.

As the car crossed the zone of scattered dwellings that separated
Oakland from Berkeley, he kept a lookout for a familiar, two-story
building along the front of which ran the proud sign, HIGGINBOTHAM’S
CASH STORE. Martin Eden got off at this corner. He stared up for a
moment at the sign. It carried a message to him beyond its mere
wording. A personality of smallness and egotism and petty
underhandedness seemed to emanate from the letters themselves. Bernard
Higginbotham had married his sister, and he knew him well. He let
himself in with a latch-key and climbed the stairs to the second floor.
Here lived his brother-in-law. The grocery was below. There was a smell
of stale vegetables in the air. As he groped his way across the hall he
stumbled over a toy-cart, left there by one of his numerous nephews and
nieces, and brought up against a door with a resounding bang. “The
pincher,” was his thought; “too miserly to burn two cents’ worth of gas
and save his boarders’ necks.”

He fumbled for the knob and entered a lighted room, where sat his
sister and Bernard Higginbotham. She was patching a pair of his
trousers, while his lean body was distributed over two chairs, his feet
dangling in dilapidated carpet-slippers over the edge of the second
chair. He glanced across the top of the paper he was reading, showing a
pair of dark, insincere, sharp-staring eyes. Martin Eden never looked
at him without experiencing a sense of repulsion. What his sister had
seen in the man was beyond him. The other affected him as so much
vermin, and always aroused in him an impulse to crush him under his
foot. “Some day I’ll beat the face off of him,” was the way he often
consoled himself for enduring the man’s existence. The eyes,
weasel-like and cruel, were looking at him complainingly.

“Well,” Martin demanded. “Out with it.”

“I had that door painted only last week,” Mr. Higginbotham half whined,
half bullied; “and you know what union wages are. You should be more
careful.”

Martin had intended to reply, but he was struck by the hopelessness of
it. He gazed across the monstrous sordidness of soul to a chromo on the
wall. It surprised him. He had always liked it, but it seemed that now
he was seeing it for the first time. It was cheap, that was what it
was, like everything else in this house. His mind went back to the
house he had just left, and he saw, first, the paintings, and next,
Her, looking at him with melting sweetness as she shook his hand at
leaving. He forgot where he was and Bernard Higginbotham’s existence,
till that gentleman demanded:-

“Seen a ghost?”

Martin came back and looked at the beady eyes, sneering, truculent,
cowardly, and there leaped into his vision, as on a screen, the same
eyes when their owner was making a sale in the store below—subservient
eyes, smug, and oily, and flattering.

“Yes,” Martin answered. “I seen a ghost. Good night. Good night,
Gertrude.”

He started to leave the room, tripping over a loose seam in the
slatternly carpet.

“Don’t bang the door,” Mr. Higginbotham cautioned him.

He felt the blood crawl in his veins, but controlled himself and closed
the door softly behind him.

Mr. Higginbotham looked at his wife exultantly.

“He’s ben drinkin’,” he proclaimed in a hoarse whisper. “I told you he
would.”

She nodded her head resignedly.

“His eyes was pretty shiny,” she confessed; “and he didn’t have no
collar, though he went away with one. But mebbe he didn’t have more’n a
couple of glasses.”

“He couldn’t stand up straight,” asserted her husband. “I watched him.
He couldn’t walk across the floor without stumblin’. You heard ’m
yourself almost fall down in the hall.”

“I think it was over Alice’s cart,” she said. “He couldn’t see it in
the dark.”

Mr. Higginbotham’s voice and wrath began to rise. All day he effaced
himself in the store, reserving for the evening, with his family, the
privilege of being himself.

“I tell you that precious brother of yours was drunk.”

His voice was cold, sharp, and final, his lips stamping the enunciation
of each word like the die of a machine. His wife sighed and remained
silent. She was a large, stout woman, always dressed slatternly and
always tired from the burdens of her flesh, her work, and her husband.

“He’s got it in him, I tell you, from his father,” Mr. Higginbotham
went on accusingly. “An’ he’ll croak in the gutter the same way. You
know that.”

She nodded, sighed, and went on stitching. They were agreed that Martin
had come home drunk. They did not have it in their souls to know
beauty, or they would have known that those shining eyes and that
glowing face betokened youth’s first vision of love.

“Settin’ a fine example to the children,” Mr. Higginbotham snorted,
suddenly, in the silence for which his wife was responsible and which
he resented. Sometimes he almost wished she would oppose him more. “If
he does it again, he’s got to get out. Understand! I won’t put up with
his shinanigan—debotchin’ innocent children with his boozing.” Mr.
Higginbotham liked the word, which was a new one in his vocabulary,
recently gleaned from a newspaper column. “That’s what it is,
debotchin’—there ain’t no other name for it.”

Still his wife sighed, shook her head sorrowfully, and stitched on. Mr.
Higginbotham resumed the newspaper.

“Has he paid last week’s board?” he shot across the top of the
newspaper.

She nodded, then added, “He still has some money.”

“When is he goin’ to sea again?”

“When his pay-day’s spent, I guess,” she answered. “He was over to San
Francisco yesterday looking for a ship. But he’s got money, yet, an’
he’s particular about the kind of ship he signs for.”

“It’s not for a deck-swab like him to put on airs,” Mr. Higginbotham
snorted. “Particular! Him!”

“He said something about a schooner that’s gettin’ ready to go off to
some outlandish place to look for buried treasure, that he’d sail on
her if his money held out.”

“If he only wanted to steady down, I’d give him a job drivin’ the
wagon,” her husband said, but with no trace of benevolence in his
voice. “Tom’s quit.”

His wife looked alarm and interrogation.

“Quit to-night. Is goin’ to work for Carruthers. They paid ’m more’n I
could afford.”

“I told you you’d lose ’m,” she cried out. “He was worth more’n you was
giving him.”

“Now look here, old woman,” Higginbotham bullied, “for the thousandth
time I’ve told you to keep your nose out of the business. I won’t tell
you again.”

“I don’t care,” she sniffled. “Tom was a good boy.” Her husband glared
at her. This was unqualified defiance.

“If that brother of yours was worth his salt, he could take the wagon,”
he snorted.

“He pays his board, just the same,” was the retort. “An’ he’s my
brother, an’ so long as he don’t owe you money you’ve got no right to
be jumping on him all the time. I’ve got some feelings, if I have been
married to you for seven years.”

“Did you tell ’m you’d charge him for gas if he goes on readin’ in
bed?” he demanded.

Mrs. Higginbotham made no reply. Her revolt faded away, her spirit
wilting down into her tired flesh. Her husband was triumphant. He had
her. His eyes snapped vindictively, while his ears joyed in the
sniffles she emitted. He extracted great happiness from squelching her,
and she squelched easily these days, though it had been different in
the first years of their married life, before the brood of children and
his incessant nagging had sapped her energy.

“Well, you tell ’m to-morrow, that’s all,” he said. “An’ I just want to
tell you, before I forget it, that you’d better send for Marian
to-morrow to take care of the children. With Tom quit, I’ll have to be
out on the wagon, an’ you can make up your mind to it to be down below
waitin’ on the counter.”

“But to-morrow’s wash day,” she objected weakly.

“Get up early, then, an’ do it first. I won’t start out till ten
o’clock.”

He crinkled the paper viciously and resumed his reading.




CHAPTER IV.


Martin Eden, with blood still crawling from contact with his
brother-in-law, felt his way along the unlighted back hall and entered
his room, a tiny cubbyhole with space for a bed, a wash-stand, and one
chair. Mr. Higginbotham was too thrifty to keep a servant when his wife
could do the work. Besides, the servant’s room enabled them to take in
two boarders instead of one. Martin placed the Swinburne and Browning
on the chair, took off his coat, and sat down on the bed. A screeching
of asthmatic springs greeted the weight of his body, but he did not
notice them. He started to take off his shoes, but fell to staring at
the white plaster wall opposite him, broken by long streaks of dirty
brown where rain had leaked through the roof. On this befouled
background visions began to flow and burn. He forgot his shoes and
stared long, till his lips began to move and he murmured, “Ruth.”

“Ruth.” He had not thought a simple sound could be so beautiful. It
delighted his ear, and he grew intoxicated with the repetition of it.
“Ruth.” It was a talisman, a magic word to conjure with. Each time he
murmured it, her face shimmered before him, suffusing the foul wall
with a golden radiance. This radiance did not stop at the wall. It
extended on into infinity, and through its golden depths his soul went
questing after hers. The best that was in him was out in splendid
flood. The very thought of her ennobled and purified him, made him
better, and made him want to be better. This was new to him. He had
never known women who had made him better. They had always had the
counter effect of making him beastly. He did not know that many of them
had done their best, bad as it was. Never having been conscious of
himself, he did not know that he had that in his being that drew love
from women and which had been the cause of their reaching out for his
youth. Though they had often bothered him, he had never bothered about
them; and he would never have dreamed that there were women who had
been better because of him. Always in sublime carelessness had he
lived, till now, and now it seemed to him that they had always reached
out and dragged at him with vile hands. This was not just to them, nor
to himself. But he, who for the first time was becoming conscious of
himself, was in no condition to judge, and he burned with shame as he
stared at the vision of his infamy.

He got up abruptly and tried to see himself in the dirty looking-glass
over the wash-stand. He passed a towel over it and looked again, long
and carefully. It was the first time he had ever really seen himself.
His eyes were made for seeing, but up to that moment they had been
filled with the ever changing panorama of the world, at which he had
been too busy gazing, ever to gaze at himself. He saw the head and face
of a young fellow of twenty, but, being unused to such appraisement, he
did not know how to value it. Above a square-domed forehead he saw a
mop of brown hair, nut-brown, with a wave to it and hints of curls that
were a delight to any woman, making hands tingle to stroke it and
fingers tingle to pass caresses through it. But he passed it by as
without merit, in Her eyes, and dwelt long and thoughtfully on the
high, square forehead,—striving to penetrate it and learn the quality
of its content. What kind of a brain lay behind there? was his
insistent interrogation. What was it capable of? How far would it take
him? Would it take him to her?

He wondered if there was soul in those steel-gray eyes that were often
quite blue of color and that were strong with the briny airs of the
sun-washed deep. He wondered, also, how his eyes looked to her. He
tried to imagine himself she, gazing into those eyes of his, but failed
in the jugglery. He could successfully put himself inside other men’s
minds, but they had to be men whose ways of life he knew. He did not
know her way of life. She was wonder and mystery, and how could he
guess one thought of hers? Well, they were honest eyes, he concluded,
and in them was neither smallness nor meanness. The brown sunburn of
his face surprised him. He had not dreamed he was so black. He rolled
up his shirt-sleeve and compared the white underside of the arm with
his face. Yes, he was a white man, after all. But the arms were
sunburned, too. He twisted his arm, rolled the biceps over with his
other hand, and gazed underneath where he was least touched by the sun.
It was very white. He laughed at his bronzed face in the glass at the
thought that it was once as white as the underside of his arm; nor did
he dream that in the world there were few pale spirits of women who
could boast fairer or smoother skins than he—fairer than where he had
escaped the ravages of the sun.

His might have been a cherub’s mouth, had not the full, sensuous lips a
trick, under stress, of drawing firmly across the teeth. At times, so
tightly did they draw, the mouth became stern and harsh, even ascetic.
They were the lips of a fighter and of a lover. They could taste the
sweetness of life with relish, and they could put the sweetness aside
and command life. The chin and jaw, strong and just hinting of square
aggressiveness, helped the lips to command life. Strength balanced
sensuousness and had upon it a tonic effect, compelling him to love
beauty that was healthy and making him vibrate to sensations that were
wholesome. And between the lips were teeth that had never known nor
needed the dentist’s care. They were white and strong and regular, he
decided, as he looked at them. But as he looked, he began to be
troubled. Somewhere, stored away in the recesses of his mind and
vaguely remembered, was the impression that there were people who
washed their teeth every day. They were the people from up above—people
in her class. She must wash her teeth every day, too. What would she
think if she learned that he had never washed his teeth in all the days
of his life? He resolved to get a tooth-brush and form the habit. He
would begin at once, to-morrow. It was not by mere achievement that he
could hope to win to her. He must make a personal reform in all things,
even to tooth-washing and neck-gear, though a starched collar affected
him as a renunciation of freedom.

He held up his hand, rubbing the ball of the thumb over the calloused
palm and gazing at the dirt that was ingrained in the flesh itself and
which no brush could scrub away. How different was her palm! He
thrilled deliciously at the remembrance. Like a rose-petal, he thought;
cool and soft as a snowflake. He had never thought that a mere woman’s
hand could be so sweetly soft. He caught himself imagining the wonder
of a caress from such a hand, and flushed guiltily. It was too gross a
thought for her. In ways it seemed to impugn her high spirituality. She
was a pale, slender spirit, exalted far beyond the flesh; but
nevertheless the softness of her palm persisted in his thoughts. He was
used to the harsh callousness of factory girls and working women. Well
he knew why their hands were rough; but this hand of hers . . . It was
soft because she had never used it to work with. The gulf yawned
between her and him at the awesome thought of a person who did not have
to work for a living. He suddenly saw the aristocracy of the people who
did not labor. It towered before him on the wall, a figure in brass,
arrogant and powerful. He had worked himself; his first memories seemed
connected with work, and all his family had worked. There was Gertrude.
When her hands were not hard from the endless housework, they were
swollen and red like boiled beef, what of the washing. And there was
his sister Marian. She had worked in the cannery the preceding summer,
and her slim, pretty hands were all scarred with the tomato-knives.
Besides, the tips of two of her fingers had been left in the cutting
machine at the paper-box factory the preceding winter. He remembered
the hard palms of his mother as she lay in her coffin. And his father
had worked to the last fading gasp; the horned growth on his hands must
have been half an inch thick when he died. But Her hands were soft, and
her mother’s hands, and her brothers’. This last came to him as a
surprise; it was tremendously indicative of the highness of their
caste, of the enormous distance that stretched between her and him.

He sat back on the bed with a bitter laugh, and finished taking off his
shoes. He was a fool; he had been made drunken by a woman’s face and by
a woman’s soft, white hands. And then, suddenly, before his eyes, on
the foul plaster-wall appeared a vision. He stood in front of a gloomy
tenement house. It was night-time, in the East End of London, and
before him stood Margey, a little factory girl of fifteen. He had seen
her home after the bean-feast. She lived in that gloomy tenement, a
place not fit for swine. His hand was going out to hers as he said good
night. She had put her lips up to be kissed, but he wasn’t going to
kiss her. Somehow he was afraid of her. And then her hand closed on his
and pressed feverishly. He felt her callouses grind and grate on his,
and a great wave of pity welled over him. He saw her yearning, hungry
eyes, and her ill-fed female form which had been rushed from childhood
into a frightened and ferocious maturity; then he put his arms about
her in large tolerance and stooped and kissed her on the lips. Her glad
little cry rang in his ears, and he felt her clinging to him like a
cat. Poor little starveling! He continued to stare at the vision of
what had happened in the long ago. His flesh was crawling as it had
crawled that night when she clung to him, and his heart was warm with
pity. It was a gray scene, greasy gray, and the rain drizzled greasily
on the pavement stones. And then a radiant glory shone on the wall, and
up through the other vision, displacing it, glimmered Her pale face
under its crown of golden hair, remote and inaccessible as a star.

He took the Browning and the Swinburne from the chair and kissed them.
Just the same, she told me to call again, he thought. He took another
look at himself in the glass, and said aloud, with great solemnity:-

“Martin Eden, the first thing to-morrow you go to the free library an’
read up on etiquette. Understand!”

He turned off the gas, and the springs shrieked under his body.

“But you’ve got to quit cussin’, Martin, old boy; you’ve got to quit
cussin’,” he said aloud.

Then he dozed off to sleep and to dream dreams that for madness and
audacity rivalled those of poppy-eaters.




CHAPTER V.


He awoke next morning from rosy scenes of dream to a steamy atmosphere
that smelled of soapsuds and dirty clothes, and that was vibrant with
the jar and jangle of tormented life. As he came out of his room he
heard the slosh of water, a sharp exclamation, and a resounding smack
as his sister visited her irritation upon one of her numerous progeny.
The squall of the child went through him like a knife. He was aware
that the whole thing, the very air he breathed, was repulsive and mean.
How different, he thought, from the atmosphere of beauty and repose of
the house wherein Ruth dwelt. There it was all spiritual. Here it was
all material, and meanly material.

“Come here, Alfred,” he called to the crying child, at the same time
thrusting his hand into his trousers pocket, where he carried his money
loose in the same large way that he lived life in general. He put a
quarter in the youngster’s hand and held him in his arms a moment,
soothing his sobs. “Now run along and get some candy, and don’t forget
to give some to your brothers and sisters. Be sure and get the kind
that lasts longest.”

His sister lifted a flushed face from the wash-tub and looked at him.

“A nickel’d ha’ ben enough,” she said. “It’s just like you, no idea of
the value of money. The child’ll eat himself sick.”

“That’s all right, sis,” he answered jovially. “My money’ll take care
of itself. If you weren’t so busy, I’d kiss you good morning.”

He wanted to be affectionate to this sister, who was good, and who, in
her way, he knew, loved him. But, somehow, she grew less herself as the
years went by, and more and more baffling. It was the hard work, the
many children, and the nagging of her husband, he decided, that had
changed her. It came to him, in a flash of fancy, that her nature
seemed taking on the attributes of stale vegetables, smelly soapsuds,
and of the greasy dimes, nickels, and quarters she took in over the
counter of the store.

“Go along an’ get your breakfast,” she said roughly, though secretly
pleased. Of all her wandering brood of brothers he had always been her
favorite. “I declare I _will_ kiss you,” she said, with a sudden stir
at her heart.

With thumb and forefinger she swept the dripping suds first from one
arm and then from the other. He put his arms round her massive waist
and kissed her wet steamy lips. The tears welled into her eyes—not so
much from strength of feeling as from the weakness of chronic overwork.
She shoved him away from her, but not before he caught a glimpse of her
moist eyes.

“You’ll find breakfast in the oven,” she said hurriedly. “Jim ought to
be up now. I had to get up early for the washing. Now get along with
you and get out of the house early. It won’t be nice to-day, what of
Tom quittin’ an’ nobody but Bernard to drive the wagon.”

Martin went into the kitchen with a sinking heart, the image of her red
face and slatternly form eating its way like acid into his brain. She
might love him if she only had some time, he concluded. But she was
worked to death. Bernard Higginbotham was a brute to work her so hard.
But he could not help but feel, on the other hand, that there had not
been anything beautiful in that kiss. It was true, it was an unusual
kiss. For years she had kissed him only when he returned from voyages
or departed on voyages. But this kiss had tasted of soapsuds, and the
lips, he had noticed, were flabby. There had been no quick, vigorous
lip-pressure such as should accompany any kiss. Hers was the kiss of a
tired woman who had been tired so long that she had forgotten how to
kiss. He remembered her as a girl, before her marriage, when she would
dance with the best, all night, after a hard day’s work at the laundry,
and think nothing of leaving the dance to go to another day’s hard
work. And then he thought of Ruth and the cool sweetness that must
reside in her lips as it resided in all about her. Her kiss would be
like her hand-shake or the way she looked at one, firm and frank. In
imagination he dared to think of her lips on his, and so vividly did he
imagine that he went dizzy at the thought and seemed to rift through
clouds of rose-petals, filling his brain with their perfume.

In the kitchen he found Jim, the other boarder, eating mush very
languidly, with a sick, far-away look in his eyes. Jim was a plumber’s
apprentice whose weak chin and hedonistic temperament, coupled with a
certain nervous stupidity, promised to take him nowhere in the race for
bread and butter.

“Why don’t you eat?” he demanded, as Martin dipped dolefully into the
cold, half-cooked oatmeal mush. “Was you drunk again last night?”

Martin shook his head. He was oppressed by the utter squalidness of it
all. Ruth Morse seemed farther removed than ever.

“I was,” Jim went on with a boastful, nervous giggle. “I was loaded
right to the neck. Oh, she was a daisy. Billy brought me home.”

Martin nodded that he heard,—it was a habit of nature with him to pay
heed to whoever talked to him,—and poured a cup of lukewarm coffee.

“Goin’ to the Lotus Club dance to-night?” Jim demanded. “They’re goin’
to have beer, an’ if that Temescal bunch comes, there’ll be a
rough-house. I don’t care, though. I’m takin’ my lady friend just the
same. Cripes, but I’ve got a taste in my mouth!”

He made a wry face and attempted to wash the taste away with coffee.

“D’ye know Julia?”

Martin shook his head.

“She’s my lady friend,” Jim explained, “and she’s a peach. I’d
introduce you to her, only you’d win her. I don’t see what the girls
see in you, honest I don’t; but the way you win them away from the
fellers is sickenin’.”

“I never got any away from you,” Martin answered uninterestedly. The
breakfast had to be got through somehow.

“Yes, you did, too,” the other asserted warmly. “There was Maggie.”

“Never had anything to do with her. Never danced with her except that
one night.”

“Yes, an’ that’s just what did it,” Jim cried out. “You just danced
with her an’ looked at her, an’ it was all off. Of course you didn’t
mean nothin’ by it, but it settled me for keeps. Wouldn’t look at me
again. Always askin’ about you. She’d have made fast dates enough with
you if you’d wanted to.”

“But I didn’t want to.”

“Wasn’t necessary. I was left at the pole.” Jim looked at him
admiringly. “How d’ye do it, anyway, Mart?”

“By not carin’ about ’em,” was the answer.

“You mean makin’ b’lieve you don’t care about them?” Jim queried
eagerly.

Martin considered for a moment, then answered, “Perhaps that will do,
but with me I guess it’s different. I never have cared—much. If you can
put it on, it’s all right, most likely.”

“You should ’a’ ben up at Riley’s barn last night,” Jim announced
inconsequently. “A lot of the fellers put on the gloves. There was a
peach from West Oakland. They called ’m ‘The Rat.’ Slick as silk. No
one could touch ’m. We was all wishin’ you was there. Where was you
anyway?”

“Down in Oakland,” Martin replied.

“To the show?”

Martin shoved his plate away and got up.

“Comin’ to the dance to-night?” the other called after him.

“No, I think not,” he answered.

He went downstairs and out into the street, breathing great breaths of
air. He had been suffocating in that atmosphere, while the apprentice’s
chatter had driven him frantic. There had been times when it was all he
could do to refrain from reaching over and mopping Jim’s face in the
mush-plate. The more he had chattered, the more remote had Ruth seemed
to him. How could he, herding with such cattle, ever become worthy of
her? He was appalled at the problem confronting him, weighted down by
the incubus of his working-class station. Everything reached out to
hold him down—his sister, his sister’s house and family, Jim the
apprentice, everybody he knew, every tie of life. Existence did not
taste good in his mouth. Up to then he had accepted existence, as he
had lived it with all about him, as a good thing. He had never
questioned it, except when he read books; but then, they were only
books, fairy stories of a fairer and impossible world. But now he had
seen that world, possible and real, with a flower of a woman called
Ruth in the midmost centre of it; and thenceforth he must know bitter
tastes, and longings sharp as pain, and hopelessness that tantalized
because it fed on hope.

He had debated between the Berkeley Free Library and the Oakland Free
Library, and decided upon the latter because Ruth lived in Oakland. Who
could tell?—a library was a most likely place for her, and he might see
her there. He did not know the way of libraries, and he wandered
through endless rows of fiction, till the delicate-featured
French-looking girl who seemed in charge, told him that the reference
department was upstairs. He did not know enough to ask the man at the
desk, and began his adventures in the philosophy alcove. He had heard
of book philosophy, but had not imagined there had been so much written
about it. The high, bulging shelves of heavy tomes humbled him and at
the same time stimulated him. Here was work for the vigor of his brain.
He found books on trigonometry in the mathematics section, and ran the
pages, and stared at the meaningless formulas and figures. He could
read English, but he saw there an alien speech. Norman and Arthur knew
that speech. He had heard them talking it. And they were her brothers.
He left the alcove in despair. From every side the books seemed to
press upon him and crush him.

He had never dreamed that the fund of human knowledge bulked so big. He
was frightened. How could his brain ever master it all? Later, he
remembered that there were other men, many men, who had mastered it;
and he breathed a great oath, passionately, under his breath, swearing
that his brain could do what theirs had done.

And so he wandered on, alternating between depression and elation as he
stared at the shelves packed with wisdom. In one miscellaneous section
he came upon a “Norrie’s Epitome.” He turned the pages reverently. In a
way, it spoke a kindred speech. Both he and it were of the sea. Then he
found a “Bowditch” and books by Lecky and Marshall. There it was; he
would teach himself navigation. He would quit drinking, work up, and
become a captain. Ruth seemed very near to him in that moment. As a
captain, he could marry her (if she would have him). And if she
wouldn’t, well—he would live a good life among men, because of Her, and
he would quit drinking anyway. Then he remembered the underwriters and
the owners, the two masters a captain must serve, either of which could
and would break him and whose interests were diametrically opposed. He
cast his eyes about the room and closed the lids down on a vision of
ten thousand books. No; no more of the sea for him. There was power in
all that wealth of books, and if he would do great things, he must do
them on the land. Besides, captains were not allowed to take their
wives to sea with them.

Noon came, and afternoon. He forgot to eat, and sought on for the books
on etiquette; for, in addition to career, his mind was vexed by a
simple and very concrete problem: _When you meet a young lady and she
asks you to call, how soon can you call_? was the way he worded it to
himself. But when he found the right shelf, he sought vainly for the
answer. He was appalled at the vast edifice of etiquette, and lost
himself in the mazes of visiting-card conduct between persons in polite
society. He abandoned his search. He had not found what he wanted,
though he had found that it would take all of a man’s time to be
polite, and that he would have to live a preliminary life in which to
learn how to be polite.

“Did you find what you wanted?” the man at the desk asked him as he was
leaving.

“Yes, sir,” he answered. “You have a fine library here.”

The man nodded. “We should be glad to see you here often. Are you a
sailor?”

“Yes, sir,” he answered. “And I’ll come again.”

Now, how did he know that? he asked himself as he went down the stairs.

And for the first block along the street he walked very stiff and
straight and awkwardly, until he forgot himself in his thoughts,
whereupon his rolling gait gracefully returned to him.




CHAPTER VI.


A terrible restlessness that was akin to hunger afflicted Martin Eden.
He was famished for a sight of the girl whose slender hands had gripped
his life with a giant’s grasp. He could not steel himself to call upon
her. He was afraid that he might call too soon, and so be guilty of an
awful breach of that awful thing called etiquette. He spent long hours
in the Oakland and Berkeley libraries, and made out application blanks
for membership for himself, his sisters Gertrude and Marian, and Jim,
the latter’s consent being obtained at the expense of several glasses
of beer. With four cards permitting him to draw books, he burned the
gas late in the servant’s room, and was charged fifty cents a week for
it by Mr. Higginbotham.

The many books he read but served to whet his unrest. Every page of
every book was a peep-hole into the realm of knowledge. His hunger fed
upon what he read, and increased. Also, he did not know where to begin,
and continually suffered from lack of preparation. The commonest
references, that he could see plainly every reader was expected to
know, he did not know. And the same was true of the poetry he read
which maddened him with delight. He read more of Swinburne than was
contained in the volume Ruth had lent him; and “Dolores” he understood
thoroughly. But surely Ruth did not understand it, he concluded. How
could she, living the refined life she did? Then he chanced upon
Kipling’s poems, and was swept away by the lilt and swing and glamour
with which familiar things had been invested. He was amazed at the
man’s sympathy with life and at his incisive psychology. _Psychology_
was a new word in Martin’s vocabulary. He had bought a dictionary,
which deed had decreased his supply of money and brought nearer the day
on which he must sail in search of more. Also, it incensed Mr.
Higginbotham, who would have preferred the money taking the form of
board.

He dared not go near Ruth’s neighborhood in the daytime, but night
found him lurking like a thief around the Morse home, stealing glimpses
at the windows and loving the very walls that sheltered her. Several
times he barely escaped being caught by her brothers, and once he
trailed Mr. Morse down town and studied his face in the lighted
streets, longing all the while for some quick danger of death to
threaten so that he might spring in and save her father. On another
night, his vigil was rewarded by a glimpse of Ruth through a
second-story window. He saw only her head and shoulders, and her arms
raised as she fixed her hair before a mirror. It was only for a moment,
but it was a long moment to him, during which his blood turned to wine
and sang through his veins. Then she pulled down the shade. But it was
her room—he had learned that; and thereafter he strayed there often,
hiding under a dark tree on the opposite side of the street and smoking
countless cigarettes. One afternoon he saw her mother coming out of a
bank, and received another proof of the enormous distance that
separated Ruth from him. She was of the class that dealt with banks. He
had never been inside a bank in his life, and he had an idea that such
institutions were frequented only by the very rich and the very
powerful.

In one way, he had undergone a moral revolution. Her cleanness and
purity had reacted upon him, and he felt in his being a crying need to
be clean. He must be that if he were ever to be worthy of breathing the
same air with her. He washed his teeth, and scrubbed his hands with a
kitchen scrub-brush till he saw a nail-brush in a drug-store window and
divined its use. While purchasing it, the clerk glanced at his nails,
suggested a nail-file, and so he became possessed of an additional
toilet-tool. He ran across a book in the library on the care of the
body, and promptly developed a penchant for a cold-water bath every
morning, much to the amazement of Jim, and to the bewilderment of Mr.
Higginbotham, who was not in sympathy with such high-fangled notions
and who seriously debated whether or not he should charge Martin extra
for the water. Another stride was in the direction of creased trousers.
Now that Martin was aroused in such matters, he swiftly noted the
difference between the baggy knees of the trousers worn by the working
class and the straight line from knee to foot of those worn by the men
above the working class. Also, he learned the reason why, and invaded
his sister’s kitchen in search of irons and ironing-board. He had
misadventures at first, hopelessly burning one pair and buying another,
which expenditure again brought nearer the day on which he must put to
sea.

But the reform went deeper than mere outward appearance. He still
smoked, but he drank no more. Up to that time, drinking had seemed to
him the proper thing for men to do, and he had prided himself on his
strong head which enabled him to drink most men under the table.
Whenever he encountered a chance shipmate, and there were many in San
Francisco, he treated them and was treated in turn, as of old, but he
ordered for himself root beer or ginger ale and good-naturedly endured
their chaffing. And as they waxed maudlin he studied them, watching the
beast rise and master them and thanking God that he was no longer as
they. They had their limitations to forget, and when they were drunk,
their dim, stupid spirits were even as gods, and each ruled in his
heaven of intoxicated desire. With Martin the need for strong drink had
vanished. He was drunken in new and more profound ways—with Ruth, who
had fired him with love and with a glimpse of higher and eternal life;
with books, that had set a myriad maggots of desire gnawing in his
brain; and with the sense of personal cleanliness he was achieving,
that gave him even more superb health than what he had enjoyed and that
made his whole body sing with physical well-being.

One night he went to the theatre, on the blind chance that he might see
her there, and from the second balcony he did see her. He saw her come
down the aisle, with Arthur and a strange young man with a football mop
of hair and eyeglasses, the sight of whom spurred him to instant
apprehension and jealousy. He saw her take her seat in the orchestra
circle, and little else than her did he see that night—a pair of
slender white shoulders and a mass of pale gold hair, dim with
distance. But there were others who saw, and now and again, glancing at
those about him, he noted two young girls who looked back from the row
in front, a dozen seats along, and who smiled at him with bold eyes. He
had always been easy-going. It was not in his nature to give rebuff. In
the old days he would have smiled back, and gone further and encouraged
smiling. But now it was different. He did smile back, then looked away,
and looked no more deliberately. But several times, forgetting the
existence of the two girls, his eyes caught their smiles. He could not
re-thumb himself in a day, nor could he violate the intrinsic
kindliness of his nature; so, at such moments, he smiled at the girls
in warm human friendliness. It was nothing new to him. He knew they
were reaching out their woman’s hands to him. But it was different now.
Far down there in the orchestra circle was the one woman in all the
world, so different, so terrifically different, from these two girls of
his class, that he could feel for them only pity and sorrow. He had it
in his heart to wish that they could possess, in some small measure,
her goodness and glory. And not for the world could he hurt them
because of their outreaching. He was not flattered by it; he even felt
a slight shame at his lowliness that permitted it. He knew, did he
belong in Ruth’s class, that there would be no overtures from these
girls; and with each glance of theirs he felt the fingers of his own
class clutching at him to hold him down.

He left his seat before the curtain went down on the last act, intent
on seeing Her as she passed out. There were always numbers of men who
stood on the sidewalk outside, and he could pull his cap down over his
eyes and screen himself behind some one’s shoulder so that she should
not see him. He emerged from the theatre with the first of the crowd;
but scarcely had he taken his position on the edge of the sidewalk when
the two girls appeared. They were looking for him, he knew; and for the
moment he could have cursed that in him which drew women. Their casual
edging across the sidewalk to the curb, as they drew near, apprised him
of discovery. They slowed down, and were in the thick of the crowd as
they came up with him. One of them brushed against him and apparently
for the first time noticed him. She was a slender, dark girl, with
black, defiant eyes. But they smiled at him, and he smiled back.

“Hello,” he said.

It was automatic; he had said it so often before under similar
circumstances of first meetings. Besides, he could do no less. There
was that large tolerance and sympathy in his nature that would permit
him to do no less. The black-eyed girl smiled gratification and
greeting, and showed signs of stopping, while her companion, arm linked
in arm, giggled and likewise showed signs of halting. He thought
quickly. It would never do for Her to come out and see him talking
there with them. Quite naturally, as a matter of course, he swung in
along-side the dark-eyed one and walked with her. There was no
awkwardness on his part, no numb tongue. He was at home here, and he
held his own royally in the badinage, bristling with slang and
sharpness, that was always the preliminary to getting acquainted in
these swift-moving affairs. At the corner where the main stream of
people flowed onward, he started to edge out into the cross street. But
the girl with the black eyes caught his arm, following him and dragging
her companion after her, as she cried:

“Hold on, Bill! What’s yer rush? You’re not goin’ to shake us so sudden
as all that?”

He halted with a laugh, and turned, facing them. Across their shoulders
he could see the moving throng passing under the street lamps. Where he
stood it was not so light, and, unseen, he would be able to see Her as
she passed by. She would certainly pass by, for that way led home.

“What’s her name?” he asked of the giggling girl, nodding at the
dark-eyed one.

“You ask her,” was the convulsed response.

“Well, what is it?” he demanded, turning squarely on the girl in
question.

“You ain’t told me yours, yet,” she retorted.

“You never asked it,” he smiled. “Besides, you guessed the first
rattle. It’s Bill, all right, all right.”

“Aw, go ’long with you.” She looked him in the eyes, her own sharply
passionate and inviting. “What is it, honest?”

Again she looked. All the centuries of woman since sex began were
eloquent in her eyes. And he measured her in a careless way, and knew,
bold now, that she would begin to retreat, coyly and delicately, as he
pursued, ever ready to reverse the game should he turn fainthearted.
And, too, he was human, and could feel the draw of her, while his ego
could not but appreciate the flattery of her kindness. Oh, he knew it
all, and knew them well, from A to Z. Good, as goodness might be
measured in their particular class, hard-working for meagre wages and
scorning the sale of self for easier ways, nervously desirous for some
small pinch of happiness in the desert of existence, and facing a
future that was a gamble between the ugliness of unending toil and the
black pit of more terrible wretchedness, the way whereto being briefer
though better paid.

“Bill,” he answered, nodding his head. “Sure, Pete, Bill an’ no other.”

“No joshin’?” she queried.

“It ain’t Bill at all,” the other broke in.

“How do you know?” he demanded. “You never laid eyes on me before.”

“No need to, to know you’re lyin’,” was the retort.

“Straight, Bill, what is it?” the first girl asked.

“Bill’ll do,” he confessed.

She reached out to his arm and shook him playfully. “I knew you was
lyin’, but you look good to me just the same.”

He captured the hand that invited, and felt on the palm familiar
markings and distortions.

“When’d you chuck the cannery?” he asked.

“How’d yeh know?” and, “My, ain’t cheh a mind-reader!” the girls
chorussed.

And while he exchanged the stupidities of stupid minds with them,
before his inner sight towered the book-shelves of the library, filled
with the wisdom of the ages. He smiled bitterly at the incongruity of
it, and was assailed by doubts. But between inner vision and outward
pleasantry he found time to watch the theatre crowd streaming by. And
then he saw Her, under the lights, between her brother and the strange
young man with glasses, and his heart seemed to stand still. He had
waited long for this moment. He had time to note the light, fluffy
something that hid her queenly head, the tasteful lines of her wrapped
figure, the gracefulness of her carriage and of the hand that caught up
her skirts; and then she was gone and he was left staring at the two
girls of the cannery, at their tawdry attempts at prettiness of dress,
their tragic efforts to be clean and trim, the cheap cloth, the cheap
ribbons, and the cheap rings on the fingers. He felt a tug at his arm,
and heard a voice saying:-

“Wake up, Bill! What’s the matter with you?”

“What was you sayin’?” he asked.

“Oh, nothin’,” the dark girl answered, with a toss of her head. “I was
only remarkin’—”

“What?”

“Well, I was whisperin’ it’d be a good idea if you could dig up a
gentleman friend—for her” (indicating her companion), “and then, we
could go off an’ have ice-cream soda somewhere, or coffee, or
anything.”

He was afflicted by a sudden spiritual nausea. The transition from Ruth
to this had been too abrupt. Ranged side by side with the bold, defiant
eyes of the girl before him, he saw Ruth’s clear, luminous eyes, like a
saint’s, gazing at him out of unplumbed depths of purity. And, somehow,
he felt within him a stir of power. He was better than this. Life meant
more to him than it meant to these two girls whose thoughts did not go
beyond ice-cream and a gentleman friend. He remembered that he had led
always a secret life in his thoughts. These thoughts he had tried to
share, but never had he found a woman capable of understanding—nor a
man. He had tried, at times, but had only puzzled his listeners. And as
his thoughts had been beyond them, so, he argued now, he must be beyond
them. He felt power move in him, and clenched his fists. If life meant
more to him, then it was for him to demand more from life, but he could
not demand it from such companionship as this. Those bold black eyes
had nothing to offer. He knew the thoughts behind them—of ice-cream and
of something else. But those saint’s eyes alongside—they offered all he
knew and more than he could guess. They offered books and painting,
beauty and repose, and all the fine elegance of higher existence.
Behind those black eyes he knew every thought process. It was like
clockwork. He could watch every wheel go around. Their bid was low
pleasure, narrow as the grave, that palled, and the grave was at the
end of it. But the bid of the saint’s eyes was mystery, and wonder
unthinkable, and eternal life. He had caught glimpses of the soul in
them, and glimpses of his own soul, too.

“There’s only one thing wrong with the programme,” he said aloud. “I’ve
got a date already.”

The girl’s eyes blazed her disappointment.

“To sit up with a sick friend, I suppose?” she sneered.

“No, a real, honest date with—” he faltered, “with a girl.”

“You’re not stringin’ me?” she asked earnestly.

He looked her in the eyes and answered: “It’s straight, all right. But
why can’t we meet some other time? You ain’t told me your name yet. An’
where d’ye live?”

“Lizzie,” she replied, softening toward him, her hand pressing his arm,
while her body leaned against his. “Lizzie Connolly. And I live at
Fifth an’ Market.”

He talked on a few minutes before saying good night. He did not go home
immediately; and under the tree where he kept his vigils he looked up
at a window and murmured: “That date was with you, Ruth. I kept it for
you.”




CHAPTER VII.


A week of heavy reading had passed since the evening he first met Ruth
Morse, and still he dared not call. Time and again he nerved himself up
to call, but under the doubts that assailed him his determination died
away. He did not know the proper time to call, nor was there any one to
tell him, and he was afraid of committing himself to an irretrievable
blunder. Having shaken himself free from his old companions and old
ways of life, and having no new companions, nothing remained for him
but to read, and the long hours he devoted to it would have ruined a
dozen pairs of ordinary eyes. But his eyes were strong, and they were
backed by a body superbly strong. Furthermore, his mind was fallow. It
had lain fallow all his life so far as the abstract thought of the
books was concerned, and it was ripe for the sowing. It had never been
jaded by study, and it bit hold of the knowledge in the books with
sharp teeth that would not let go.

It seemed to him, by the end of the week, that he had lived centuries,
so far behind were the old life and outlook. But he was baffled by lack
of preparation. He attempted to read books that required years of
preliminary specialization. One day he would read a book of antiquated
philosophy, and the next day one that was ultra-modern, so that his
head would be whirling with the conflict and contradiction of ideas. It
was the same with the economists. On the one shelf at the library he
found Karl Marx, Ricardo, Adam Smith, and Mill, and the abstruse
formulas of the one gave no clew that the ideas of another were
obsolete. He was bewildered, and yet he wanted to know. He had become
interested, in a day, in economics, industry, and politics. Passing
through the City Hall Park, he had noticed a group of men, in the
centre of which were half a dozen, with flushed faces and raised
voices, earnestly carrying on a discussion. He joined the listeners,
and heard a new, alien tongue in the mouths of the philosophers of the
people. One was a tramp, another was a labor agitator, a third was a
law-school student, and the remainder was composed of wordy workingmen.
For the first time he heard of socialism, anarchism, and single tax,
and learned that there were warring social philosophies. He heard
hundreds of technical words that were new to him, belonging to fields
of thought that his meagre reading had never touched upon. Because of
this he could not follow the arguments closely, and he could only guess
at and surmise the ideas wrapped up in such strange expressions. Then
there was a black-eyed restaurant waiter who was a theosophist, a union
baker who was an agnostic, an old man who baffled all of them with the
strange philosophy that _what is is right_, and another old man who
discoursed interminably about the cosmos and the father-atom and the
mother-atom.

Martin Eden’s head was in a state of addlement when he went away after
several hours, and he hurried to the library to look up the definitions
of a dozen unusual words. And when he left the library, he carried
under his arm four volumes: Madam Blavatsky’s “Secret Doctrine,”
“Progress and Poverty,” “The Quintessence of Socialism,” and “Warfare
of Religion and Science.” Unfortunately, he began on the “Secret
Doctrine.” Every line bristled with many-syllabled words he did not
understand. He sat up in bed, and the dictionary was in front of him
more often than the book. He looked up so many new words that when they
recurred, he had forgotten their meaning and had to look them up again.
He devised the plan of writing the definitions in a note-book, and
filled page after page with them. And still he could not understand. He
read until three in the morning, and his brain was in a turmoil, but
not one essential thought in the text had he grasped. He looked up, and
it seemed that the room was lifting, heeling, and plunging like a ship
upon the sea. Then he hurled the “Secret Doctrine” and many curses
across the room, turned off the gas, and composed himself to sleep. Nor
did he have much better luck with the other three books. It was not
that his brain was weak or incapable; it could think these thoughts
were it not for lack of training in thinking and lack of the
thought-tools with which to think. He guessed this, and for a while
entertained the idea of reading nothing but the dictionary until he had
mastered every word in it.

Poetry, however, was his solace, and he read much of it, finding his
greatest joy in the simpler poets, who were more understandable. He
loved beauty, and there he found beauty. Poetry, like music, stirred
him profoundly, and, though he did not know it, he was preparing his
mind for the heavier work that was to come. The pages of his mind were
blank, and, without effort, much he read and liked, stanza by stanza,
was impressed upon those pages, so that he was soon able to extract
great joy from chanting aloud or under his breath the music and the
beauty of the printed words he had read. Then he stumbled upon Gayley’s
“Classic Myths” and Bulfinch’s “Age of Fable,” side by side on a
library shelf. It was illumination, a great light in the darkness of
his ignorance, and he read poetry more avidly than ever.

The man at the desk in the library had seen Martin there so often that
he had become quite cordial, always greeting him with a smile and a nod
when he entered. It was because of this that Martin did a daring thing.
Drawing out some books at the desk, and while the man was stamping the
cards, Martin blurted out:-

“Say, there’s something I’d like to ask you.”

The man smiled and paid attention.

“When you meet a young lady an’ she asks you to call, how soon can you
call?”

Martin felt his shirt press and cling to his shoulders, what of the
sweat of the effort.

“Why I’d say any time,” the man answered.

“Yes, but this is different,” Martin objected. “She—I—well, you see,
it’s this way: maybe she won’t be there. She goes to the university.”

“Then call again.”

“What I said ain’t what I meant,” Martin confessed falteringly, while
he made up his mind to throw himself wholly upon the other’s mercy.
“I’m just a rough sort of a fellow, an’ I ain’t never seen anything of
society. This girl is all that I ain’t, an’ I ain’t anything that she
is. You don’t think I’m playin’ the fool, do you?” he demanded
abruptly.

“No, no; not at all, I assure you,” the other protested. “Your request
is not exactly in the scope of the reference department, but I shall be
only too pleased to assist you.”

Martin looked at him admiringly.

“If I could tear it off that way, I’d be all right,” he said.

“I beg pardon?”

“I mean if I could talk easy that way, an’ polite, an’ all the rest.”

“Oh,” said the other, with comprehension.

“What is the best time to call? The afternoon?—not too close to
meal-time? Or the evening? Or Sunday?”

“I’ll tell you,” the librarian said with a brightening face. “You call
her up on the telephone and find out.”

“I’ll do it,” he said, picking up his books and starting away.

He turned back and asked:-

“When you’re speakin’ to a young lady—say, for instance, Miss Lizzie
Smith—do you say ‘Miss Lizzie’? or ‘Miss Smith’?”

“Say ‘Miss Smith,’” the librarian stated authoritatively. “Say ‘Miss
Smith’ always—until you come to know her better.”

So it was that Martin Eden solved the problem.

“Come down any time; I’ll be at home all afternoon,” was Ruth’s reply
over the telephone to his stammered request as to when he could return
the borrowed books.

She met him at the door herself, and her woman’s eyes took in
immediately the creased trousers and the certain slight but indefinable
change in him for the better. Also, she was struck by his face. It was
almost violent, this health of his, and it seemed to rush out of him
and at her in waves of force. She felt the urge again of the desire to
lean toward him for warmth, and marvelled again at the effect his
presence produced upon her. And he, in turn, knew again the swimming
sensation of bliss when he felt the contact of her hand in greeting.
The difference between them lay in that she was cool and self-possessed
while his face flushed to the roots of the hair. He stumbled with his
old awkwardness after her, and his shoulders swung and lurched
perilously.

Once they were seated in the living-room, he began to get on
easily—more easily by far than he had expected. She made it easy for
him; and the gracious spirit with which she did it made him love her
more madly than ever. They talked first of the borrowed books, of the
Swinburne he was devoted to, and of the Browning he did not understand;
and she led the conversation on from subject to subject, while she
pondered the problem of how she could be of help to him. She had
thought of this often since their first meeting. She wanted to help
him. He made a call upon her pity and tenderness that no one had ever
made before, and the pity was not so much derogatory of him as maternal
in her. Her pity could not be of the common sort, when the man who drew
it was so much man as to shock her with maidenly fears and set her mind
and pulse thrilling with strange thoughts and feelings. The old
fascination of his neck was there, and there was sweetness in the
thought of laying her hands upon it. It seemed still a wanton impulse,
but she had grown more used to it. She did not dream that in such guise
new-born love would epitomize itself. Nor did she dream that the
feeling he excited in her was love. She thought she was merely
interested in him as an unusual type possessing various potential
excellencies, and she even felt philanthropic about it.

She did not know she desired him; but with him it was different. He
knew that he loved her, and he desired her as he had never before
desired anything in his life. He had loved poetry for beauty’s sake;
but since he met her the gates to the vast field of love-poetry had
been opened wide. She had given him understanding even more than
Bulfinch and Gayley. There was a line that a week before he would not
have favored with a second thought—“God’s own mad lover dying on a
kiss”; but now it was ever insistent in his mind. He marvelled at the
wonder of it and the truth; and as he gazed upon her he knew that he
could die gladly upon a kiss. He felt himself God’s own mad lover, and
no accolade of knighthood could have given him greater pride. And at
last he knew the meaning of life and why he had been born.

As he gazed at her and listened, his thoughts grew daring. He reviewed
all the wild delight of the pressure of her hand in his at the door,
and longed for it again. His gaze wandered often toward her lips, and
he yearned for them hungrily. But there was nothing gross or earthly
about this yearning. It gave him exquisite delight to watch every
movement and play of those lips as they enunciated the words she spoke;
yet they were not ordinary lips such as all men and women had. Their
substance was not mere human clay. They were lips of pure spirit, and
his desire for them seemed absolutely different from the desire that
had led him to other women’s lips. He could kiss her lips, rest his own
physical lips upon them, but it would be with the lofty and awful
fervor with which one would kiss the robe of God. He was not conscious
of this transvaluation of values that had taken place in him, and was
unaware that the light that shone in his eyes when he looked at her was
quite the same light that shines in all men’s eyes when the desire of
love is upon them. He did not dream how ardent and masculine his gaze
was, nor that the warm flame of it was affecting the alchemy of her
spirit. Her penetrative virginity exalted and disguised his own
emotions, elevating his thoughts to a star-cool chastity, and he would
have been startled to learn that there was that shining out of his
eyes, like warm waves, that flowed through her and kindled a kindred
warmth. She was subtly perturbed by it, and more than once, though she
knew not why, it disrupted her train of thought with its delicious
intrusion and compelled her to grope for the remainder of ideas partly
uttered. Speech was always easy with her, and these interruptions would
have puzzled her had she not decided that it was because he was a
remarkable type. She was very sensitive to impressions, and it was not
strange, after all, that this aura of a traveller from another world
should so affect her.

The problem in the background of her consciousness was how to help him,
and she turned the conversation in that direction; but it was Martin
who came to the point first.

“I wonder if I can get some advice from you,” he began, and received an
acquiescence of willingness that made his heart bound. “You remember
the other time I was here I said I couldn’t talk about books an’ things
because I didn’t know how? Well, I’ve ben doin’ a lot of thinkin’ ever
since. I’ve ben to the library a whole lot, but most of the books I’ve
tackled have ben over my head. Mebbe I’d better begin at the beginnin’.
I ain’t never had no advantages. I’ve worked pretty hard ever since I
was a kid, an’ since I’ve ben to the library, lookin’ with new eyes at
books—an’ lookin’ at new books, too—I’ve just about concluded that I
ain’t ben reading the right kind. You know the books you find in
cattle-camps an’ fo’c’s’ls ain’t the same you’ve got in this house, for
instance. Well, that’s the sort of readin’ matter I’ve ben accustomed
to. And yet—an’ I ain’t just makin’ a brag of it—I’ve ben different
from the people I’ve herded with. Not that I’m any better than the
sailors an’ cow-punchers I travelled with,—I was cow-punchin’ for a
short time, you know,—but I always liked books, read everything I could
lay hands on, an’—well, I guess I think differently from most of ’em.

“Now, to come to what I’m drivin’ at. I was never inside a house like
this. When I come a week ago, an’ saw all this, an’ you, an’ your
mother, an’ brothers, an’ everything—well, I liked it. I’d heard about
such things an’ read about such things in some of the books, an’ when I
looked around at your house, why, the books come true. But the thing
I’m after is I liked it. I wanted it. I want it now. I want to breathe
air like you get in this house—air that is filled with books, and
pictures, and beautiful things, where people talk in low voices an’ are
clean, an’ their thoughts are clean. The air I always breathed was
mixed up with grub an’ house-rent an’ scrappin’ an booze an’ that’s all
they talked about, too. Why, when you was crossin’ the room to kiss
your mother, I thought it was the most beautiful thing I ever seen.
I’ve seen a whole lot of life, an’ somehow I’ve seen a whole lot more
of it than most of them that was with me. I like to see, an’ I want to
see more, an’ I want to see it different.

“But I ain’t got to the point yet. Here it is. I want to make my way to
the kind of life you have in this house. There’s more in life than
booze, an’ hard work, an’ knockin’ about. Now, how am I goin’ to get
it? Where do I take hold an’ begin? I’m willin’ to work my passage, you
know, an’ I can make most men sick when it comes to hard work. Once I
get started, I’ll work night an’ day. Mebbe you think it’s funny, me
askin’ you about all this. I know you’re the last person in the world I
ought to ask, but I don’t know anybody else I could ask—unless it’s
Arthur. Mebbe I ought to ask him. If I was—”

His voice died away. His firmly planned intention had come to a halt on
the verge of the horrible probability that he should have asked Arthur
and that he had made a fool of himself. Ruth did not speak immediately.
She was too absorbed in striving to reconcile the stumbling, uncouth
speech and its simplicity of thought with what she saw in his face. She
had never looked in eyes that expressed greater power. Here was a man
who could do anything, was the message she read there, and it accorded
ill with the weakness of his spoken thought. And for that matter so
complex and quick was her own mind that she did not have a just
appreciation of simplicity. And yet she had caught an impression of
power in the very groping of this mind. It had seemed to her like a
giant writhing and straining at the bonds that held him down. Her face
was all sympathy when she did speak.

“What you need, you realize yourself, and it is education. You should
go back and finish grammar school, and then go through to high school
and university.”

“But that takes money,” he interrupted.

“Oh!” she cried. “I had not thought of that. But then you have
relatives, somebody who could assist you?”

He shook his head.

“My father and mother are dead. I’ve two sisters, one married, an’ the
other’ll get married soon, I suppose. Then I’ve a string of
brothers,—I’m the youngest,—but they never helped nobody. They’ve just
knocked around over the world, lookin’ out for number one. The oldest
died in India. Two are in South Africa now, an’ another’s on a whaling
voyage, an’ one’s travellin’ with a circus—he does trapeze work. An’ I
guess I’m just like them. I’ve taken care of myself since I was
eleven—that’s when my mother died. I’ve got to study by myself, I
guess, an’ what I want to know is where to begin.”

“I should say the first thing of all would be to get a grammar. Your
grammar is—” She had intended saying “awful,” but she amended it to “is
not particularly good.”

He flushed and sweated.

“I know I must talk a lot of slang an’ words you don’t understand. But
then they’re the only words I know—how to speak. I’ve got other words
in my mind, picked ’em up from books, but I can’t pronounce ’em, so I
don’t use ’em.”

“It isn’t what you say, so much as how you say it. You don’t mind my
being frank, do you? I don’t want to hurt you.”

“No, no,” he cried, while he secretly blessed her for her kindness.
“Fire away. I’ve got to know, an’ I’d sooner know from you than anybody
else.”

“Well, then, you say, ‘You was’; it should be, ‘You were.’ You say ‘I
seen’ for ‘I saw.’ You use the double negative—”

“What’s the double negative?” he demanded; then added humbly, “You see,
I don’t even understand your explanations.”

“I’m afraid I didn’t explain that,” she smiled. “A double negative
is—let me see—well, you say, ‘never helped nobody.’ ‘Never’ is a
negative. ‘Nobody’ is another negative. It is a rule that two negatives
make a positive. ‘Never helped nobody’ means that, not helping nobody,
they must have helped somebody.”

“That’s pretty clear,” he said. “I never thought of it before. But it
don’t mean they _must_ have helped somebody, does it? Seems to me that
‘never helped nobody’ just naturally fails to say whether or not they
helped somebody. I never thought of it before, and I’ll never say it
again.”

She was pleased and surprised with the quickness and surety of his
mind. As soon as he had got the clew he not only understood but
corrected her error.

“You’ll find it all in the grammar,” she went on. “There’s something
else I noticed in your speech. You say ‘don’t’ when you shouldn’t.
‘Don’t’ is a contraction and stands for two words. Do you know them?”

He thought a moment, then answered, “‘Do not.’”

She nodded her head, and said, “And you use ‘don’t’ when you mean ‘does
not.’”

He was puzzled over this, and did not get it so quickly.

“Give me an illustration,” he asked.

“Well—” She puckered her brows and pursed up her mouth as she thought,
while he looked on and decided that her expression was most adorable.
“‘It don’t do to be hasty.’ Change ‘don’t’ to ‘do not,’ and it reads,
‘It do not do to be hasty,’ which is perfectly absurd.”

He turned it over in his mind and considered.

“Doesn’t it jar on your ear?” she suggested.

“Can’t say that it does,” he replied judicially.

“Why didn’t you say, ‘Can’t say that it do’?” she queried.

“That sounds wrong,” he said slowly. “As for the other I can’t make up
my mind. I guess my ear ain’t had the trainin’ yours has.”

“There is no such word as ‘ain’t,’” she said, prettily emphatic.

Martin flushed again.

“And you say ‘ben’ for ‘been,’” she continued; “‘come’ for ‘came’; and
the way you chop your endings is something dreadful.”

“How do you mean?” He leaned forward, feeling that he ought to get down
on his knees before so marvellous a mind. “How do I chop?”

“You don’t complete the endings. ‘A-n-d’ spells ‘and.’ You pronounce it
‘an’.’ ‘I-n-g’ spells ‘ing.’ Sometimes you pronounce it ‘ing’ and
sometimes you leave off the ‘g.’ And then you slur by dropping initial
letters and diphthongs. ‘T-h-e-m’ spells ‘them.’ You pronounce it—oh,
well, it is not necessary to go over all of them. What you need is the
grammar. I’ll get one and show you how to begin.”

As she arose, there shot through his mind something that he had read in
the etiquette books, and he stood up awkwardly, worrying as to whether
he was doing the right thing, and fearing that she might take it as a
sign that he was about to go.

“By the way, Mr. Eden,” she called back, as she was leaving the room.
“What is _booze_? You used it several times, you know.”

“Oh, booze,” he laughed. “It’s slang. It means whiskey an’
beer—anything that will make you drunk.”

“And another thing,” she laughed back. “Don’t use ‘you’ when you are
impersonal. ‘You’ is very personal, and your use of it just now was not
precisely what you meant.”

“I don’t just see that.”

“Why, you said just now, to me, ‘whiskey and beer—anything that will
make you drunk’—make me drunk, don’t you see?”

“Well, it would, wouldn’t it?”

“Yes, of course,” she smiled. “But it would be nicer not to bring me
into it. Substitute ‘one’ for ‘you’ and see how much better it sounds.”

When she returned with the grammar, she drew a chair near his—he
wondered if he should have helped her with the chair—and sat down
beside him. She turned the pages of the grammar, and their heads were
inclined toward each other. He could hardly follow her outlining of the
work he must do, so amazed was he by her delightful propinquity. But
when she began to lay down the importance of conjugation, he forgot all
about her. He had never heard of conjugation, and was fascinated by the
glimpse he was catching into the tie-ribs of language. He leaned closer
to the page, and her hair touched his cheek. He had fainted but once in
his life, and he thought he was going to faint again. He could scarcely
breathe, and his heart was pounding the blood up into his throat and
suffocating him. Never had she seemed so accessible as now. For the
moment the great gulf that separated them was bridged. But there was no
diminution in the loftiness of his feeling for her. She had not
descended to him. It was he who had been caught up into the clouds and
carried to her. His reverence for her, in that moment, was of the same
order as religious awe and fervor. It seemed to him that he had
intruded upon the holy of holies, and slowly and carefully he moved his
head aside from the contact which thrilled him like an electric shock
and of which she had not been aware.




CHAPTER VIII.


Several weeks went by, during which Martin Eden studied his grammar,
reviewed the books on etiquette, and read voraciously the books that
caught his fancy. Of his own class he saw nothing. The girls of the
Lotus Club wondered what had become of him and worried Jim with
questions, and some of the fellows who put on the glove at Riley’s were
glad that Martin came no more. He made another discovery of
treasure-trove in the library. As the grammar had shown him the
tie-ribs of language, so that book showed him the tie-ribs of poetry,
and he began to learn metre and construction and form, beneath the
beauty he loved finding the why and wherefore of that beauty. Another
modern book he found treated poetry as a representative art, treated it
exhaustively, with copious illustrations from the best in literature.
Never had he read fiction with so keen zest as he studied these books.
And his fresh mind, untaxed for twenty years and impelled by maturity
of desire, gripped hold of what he read with a virility unusual to the
student mind.

When he looked back now from his vantage-ground, the old world he had
known, the world of land and sea and ships, of sailor-men and
harpy-women, seemed a very small world; and yet it blended in with this
new world and expanded. His mind made for unity, and he was surprised
when at first he began to see points of contact between the two worlds.
And he was ennobled, as well, by the loftiness of thought and beauty he
found in the books. This led him to believe more firmly than ever that
up above him, in society like Ruth and her family, all men and women
thought these thoughts and lived them. Down below where he lived was
the ignoble, and he wanted to purge himself of the ignoble that had
soiled all his days, and to rise to that sublimated realm where dwelt
the upper classes. All his childhood and youth had been troubled by a
vague unrest; he had never known what he wanted, but he had wanted
something that he had hunted vainly for until he met Ruth. And now his
unrest had become sharp and painful, and he knew at last, clearly and
definitely, that it was beauty, and intellect, and love that he must
have.

During those several weeks he saw Ruth half a dozen times, and each
time was an added inspiration. She helped him with his English,
corrected his pronunciation, and started him on arithmetic. But their
intercourse was not all devoted to elementary study. He had seen too
much of life, and his mind was too matured, to be wholly content with
fractions, cube root, parsing, and analysis; and there were times when
their conversation turned on other themes—the last poetry he had read,
the latest poet she had studied. And when she read aloud to him her
favorite passages, he ascended to the topmost heaven of delight. Never,
in all the women he had heard speak, had he heard a voice like hers.
The least sound of it was a stimulus to his love, and he thrilled and
throbbed with every word she uttered. It was the quality of it, the
repose, and the musical modulation—the soft, rich, indefinable product
of culture and a gentle soul. As he listened to her, there rang in the
ears of his memory the harsh cries of barbarian women and of hags, and,
in lesser degrees of harshness, the strident voices of working women
and of the girls of his own class. Then the chemistry of vision would
begin to work, and they would troop in review across his mind, each, by
contrast, multiplying Ruth’s glories. Then, too, his bliss was
heightened by the knowledge that her mind was comprehending what she
read and was quivering with appreciation of the beauty of the written
thought. She read to him much from “The Princess,” and often he saw her
eyes swimming with tears, so finely was her aesthetic nature strung. At
such moments her own emotions elevated him till he was as a god, and,
as he gazed at her and listened, he seemed gazing on the face of life
and reading its deepest secrets. And then, becoming aware of the
heights of exquisite sensibility he attained, he decided that this was
love and that love was the greatest thing in the world. And in review
would pass along the corridors of memory all previous thrills and
burnings he had known,—the drunkenness of wine, the caresses of women,
the rough play and give and take of physical contests,—and they seemed
trivial and mean compared with this sublime ardor he now enjoyed.

The situation was obscured to Ruth. She had never had any experiences
of the heart. Her only experiences in such matters were of the books,
where the facts of ordinary day were translated by fancy into a fairy
realm of unreality; and she little knew that this rough sailor was
creeping into her heart and storing there pent forces that would some
day burst forth and surge through her in waves of fire. She did not
know the actual fire of love. Her knowledge of love was purely
theoretical, and she conceived of it as lambent flame, gentle as the
fall of dew or the ripple of quiet water, and cool as the velvet-dark
of summer nights. Her idea of love was more that of placid affection,
serving the loved one softly in an atmosphere, flower-scented and
dim-lighted, of ethereal calm. She did not dream of the volcanic
convulsions of love, its scorching heat and sterile wastes of parched
ashes. She knew neither her own potencies, nor the potencies of the
world; and the deeps of life were to her seas of illusion. The conjugal
affection of her father and mother constituted her ideal of
love-affinity, and she looked forward some day to emerging, without
shock or friction, into that same quiet sweetness of existence with a
loved one.

So it was that she looked upon Martin Eden as a novelty, a strange
individual, and she identified with novelty and strangeness the effects
he produced upon her. It was only natural. In similar ways she had
experienced unusual feelings when she looked at wild animals in the
menagerie, or when she witnessed a storm of wind, or shuddered at the
bright-ribbed lightning. There was something cosmic in such things, and
there was something cosmic in him. He came to her breathing of large
airs and great spaces. The blaze of tropic suns was in his face, and in
his swelling, resilient muscles was the primordial vigor of life. He
was marred and scarred by that mysterious world of rough men and
rougher deeds, the outposts of which began beyond her horizon. He was
untamed, wild, and in secret ways her vanity was touched by the fact
that he came so mildly to her hand. Likewise she was stirred by the
common impulse to tame the wild thing. It was an unconscious impulse,
and farthest from her thoughts that her desire was to re-thumb the clay
of him into a likeness of her father’s image, which image she believed
to be the finest in the world. Nor was there any way, out of her
inexperience, for her to know that the cosmic feel she caught of him
was that most cosmic of things, love, which with equal power drew men
and women together across the world, compelled stags to kill each other
in the rutting season, and drove even the elements irresistibly to
unite.

His swift development was a source of surprise and interest. She
detected unguessed finenesses in him that seemed to bud, day by day,
like flowers in congenial soil. She read Browning aloud to him, and was
often puzzled by the strange interpretations he gave to mooted
passages. It was beyond her to realize that, out of his experience of
men and women and life, his interpretations were far more frequently
correct than hers. His conceptions seemed naive to her, though she was
often fired by his daring flights of comprehension, whose orbit-path
was so wide among the stars that she could not follow and could only
sit and thrill to the impact of unguessed power. Then she played to
him—no longer at him—and probed him with music that sank to depths
beyond her plumb-line. His nature opened to music as a flower to the
sun, and the transition was quick from his working-class rag-time and
jingles to her classical display pieces that she knew nearly by heart.
Yet he betrayed a democratic fondness for Wagner, and the “Tannhäuser”
overture, when she had given him the clew to it, claimed him as nothing
else she played. In an immediate way it personified his life. All his
past was the _Venusburg_ motif, while her he identified somehow with
the _Pilgrim’s Chorus_ motif; and from the exalted state this elevated
him to, he swept onward and upward into that vast shadow-realm of
spirit-groping, where good and evil war eternally.

Sometimes he questioned, and induced in her mind temporary doubts as to
the correctness of her own definitions and conceptions of music. But
her singing he did not question. It was too wholly her, and he sat
always amazed at the divine melody of her pure soprano voice. And he
could not help but contrast it with the weak pipings and shrill
quaverings of factory girls, ill-nourished and untrained, and with the
raucous shriekings from gin-cracked throats of the women of the seaport
towns. She enjoyed singing and playing to him. In truth, it was the
first time she had ever had a human soul to play with, and the plastic
clay of him was a delight to mould; for she thought she was moulding
it, and her intentions were good. Besides, it was pleasant to be with
him. He did not repel her. That first repulsion had been really a fear
of her undiscovered self, and the fear had gone to sleep. Though she
did not know it, she had a feeling in him of proprietary right. Also,
he had a tonic effect upon her. She was studying hard at the
university, and it seemed to strengthen her to emerge from the dusty
books and have the fresh sea-breeze of his personality blow upon her.
Strength! Strength was what she needed, and he gave it to her in
generous measure. To come into the same room with him, or to meet him
at the door, was to take heart of life. And when he had gone, she would
return to her books with a keener zest and fresh store of energy.

She knew her Browning, but it had never sunk into her that it was an
awkward thing to play with souls. As her interest in Martin increased,
the remodelling of his life became a passion with her.

“There is Mr. Butler,” she said one afternoon, when grammar and
arithmetic and poetry had been put aside.

“He had comparatively no advantages at first. His father had been a
bank cashier, but he lingered for years, dying of consumption in
Arizona, so that when he was dead, Mr. Butler, Charles Butler he was
called, found himself alone in the world. His father had come from
Australia, you know, and so he had no relatives in California. He went
to work in a printing-office,—I have heard him tell of it many
times,—and he got three dollars a week, at first. His income to-day is
at least thirty thousand a year. How did he do it? He was honest, and
faithful, and industrious, and economical. He denied himself the
enjoyments that most boys indulge in. He made it a point to save so
much every week, no matter what he had to do without in order to save
it. Of course, he was soon earning more than three dollars a week, and
as his wages increased he saved more and more.

“He worked in the daytime, and at night he went to night school. He had
his eyes fixed always on the future. Later on he went to night high
school. When he was only seventeen, he was earning excellent wages at
setting type, but he was ambitious. He wanted a career, not a
livelihood, and he was content to make immediate sacrifices for his
ultimate gain. He decided upon the law, and he entered father’s office
as an office boy—think of that!—and got only four dollars a week. But
he had learned how to be economical, and out of that four dollars he
went on saving money.”

She paused for breath, and to note how Martin was receiving it. His
face was lighted up with interest in the youthful struggles of Mr.
Butler; but there was a frown upon his face as well.

“I’d say they was pretty hard lines for a young fellow,” he remarked.
“Four dollars a week! How could he live on it? You can bet he didn’t
have any frills. Why, I pay five dollars a week for board now, an’
there’s nothin’ excitin’ about it, you can lay to that. He must have
lived like a dog. The food he ate—”

“He cooked for himself,” she interrupted, “on a little kerosene stove.”

“The food he ate must have been worse than what a sailor gets on the
worst-feedin’ deep-water ships, than which there ain’t much that can be
possibly worse.”

“But think of him now!” she cried enthusiastically. “Think of what his
income affords him. His early denials are paid for a thousand-fold.”

Martin looked at her sharply.

“There’s one thing I’ll bet you,” he said, “and it is that Mr. Butler
is nothin’ gay-hearted now in his fat days. He fed himself like that
for years an’ years, on a boy’s stomach, an’ I bet his stomach’s none
too good now for it.”

Her eyes dropped before his searching gaze.

“I’ll bet he’s got dyspepsia right now!” Martin challenged.

“Yes, he has,” she confessed; “but—”

“An’ I bet,” Martin dashed on, “that he’s solemn an’ serious as an old
owl, an’ doesn’t care a rap for a good time, for all his thirty
thousand a year. An’ I’ll bet he’s not particularly joyful at seein’
others have a good time. Ain’t I right?”

She nodded her head in agreement, and hastened to explain:-

“But he is not that type of man. By nature he is sober and serious. He
always was that.”

“You can bet he was,” Martin proclaimed. “Three dollars a week, an’
four dollars a week, an’ a young boy cookin’ for himself on an
oil-burner an’ layin’ up money, workin’ all day an’ studyin’ all night,
just workin’ an’ never playin’, never havin’ a good time, an’ never
learnin’ how to have a good time—of course his thirty thousand came
along too late.”

His sympathetic imagination was flashing upon his inner sight all the
thousands of details of the boy’s existence and of his narrow spiritual
development into a thirty-thousand-dollar-a-year man. With the
swiftness and wide-reaching of multitudinous thought Charles Butler’s
whole life was telescoped upon his vision.

“Do you know,” he added, “I feel sorry for Mr. Butler. He was too young
to know better, but he robbed himself of life for the sake of thirty
thousand a year that’s clean wasted upon him. Why, thirty thousand,
lump sum, wouldn’t buy for him right now what ten cents he was layin’
up would have bought him, when he was a kid, in the way of candy an’
peanuts or a seat in nigger heaven.”

It was just such uniqueness of points of view that startled Ruth. Not
only were they new to her, and contrary to her own beliefs, but she
always felt in them germs of truth that threatened to unseat or modify
her own convictions. Had she been fourteen instead of twenty-four, she
might have been changed by them; but she was twenty-four, conservative
by nature and upbringing, and already crystallized into the cranny of
life where she had been born and formed. It was true, his bizarre
judgments troubled her in the moments they were uttered, but she
ascribed them to his novelty of type and strangeness of living, and
they were soon forgotten. Nevertheless, while she disapproved of them,
the strength of their utterance, and the flashing of eyes and
earnestness of face that accompanied them, always thrilled her and drew
her toward him. She would never have guessed that this man who had come
from beyond her horizon, was, in such moments, flashing on beyond her
horizon with wider and deeper concepts. Her own limits were the limits
of her horizon; but limited minds can recognize limitations only in
others. And so she felt that her outlook was very wide indeed, and that
where his conflicted with hers marked his limitations; and she dreamed
of helping him to see as she saw, of widening his horizon until it was
identified with hers.

“But I have not finished my story,” she said. “He worked, so father
says, as no other office boy he ever had. Mr. Butler was always eager
to work. He never was late, and he was usually at the office a few
minutes before his regular time. And yet he saved his time. Every spare
moment was devoted to study. He studied book-keeping and type-writing,
and he paid for lessons in shorthand by dictating at night to a court
reporter who needed practice. He quickly became a clerk, and he made
himself invaluable. Father appreciated him and saw that he was bound to
rise. It was on father’s suggestion that he went to law college. He
became a lawyer, and hardly was he back in the office when father took
him in as junior partner. He is a great man. He refused the United
States Senate several times, and father says he could become a justice
of the Supreme Court any time a vacancy occurs, if he wants to. Such a
life is an inspiration to all of us. It shows us that a man with will
may rise superior to his environment.”

“He is a great man,” Martin said sincerely.

But it seemed to him there was something in the recital that jarred
upon his sense of beauty and life. He could not find an adequate motive
in Mr. Butler’s life of pinching and privation. Had he done it for love
of a woman, or for attainment of beauty, Martin would have understood.
God’s own mad lover should do anything for the kiss, but not for thirty
thousand dollars a year. He was dissatisfied with Mr. Butler’s career.
There was something paltry about it, after all. Thirty thousand a year
was all right, but dyspepsia and inability to be humanly happy robbed
such princely income of all its value.

Much of this he strove to express to Ruth, and shocked her and made it
clear that more remodelling was necessary. Hers was that common
insularity of mind that makes human creatures believe that their color,
creed, and politics are best and right and that other human creatures
scattered over the world are less fortunately placed than they. It was
the same insularity of mind that made the ancient Jew thank God he was
not born a woman, and sent the modern missionary god-substituting to
the ends of the earth; and it made Ruth desire to shape this man from
other crannies of life into the likeness of the men who lived in her
particular cranny of life.




CHAPTER IX.


Back from sea Martin Eden came, homing for California with a lover’s
desire. His store of money exhausted, he had shipped before the mast on
the treasure-hunting schooner; and the Solomon Islands, after eight
months of failure to find treasure, had witnessed the breaking up of
the expedition. The men had been paid off in Australia, and Martin had
immediately shipped on a deep-water vessel for San Francisco. Not alone
had those eight months earned him enough money to stay on land for many
weeks, but they had enabled him to do a great deal of studying and
reading.

His was the student’s mind, and behind his ability to learn was the
indomitability of his nature and his love for Ruth. The grammar he had
taken along he went through again and again until his unjaded brain had
mastered it. He noticed the bad grammar used by his shipmates, and made
a point of mentally correcting and reconstructing their crudities of
speech. To his great joy he discovered that his ear was becoming
sensitive and that he was developing grammatical nerves. A double
negative jarred him like a discord, and often, from lack of practice,
it was from his own lips that the jar came. His tongue refused to learn
new tricks in a day.

After he had been through the grammar repeatedly, he took up the
dictionary and added twenty words a day to his vocabulary. He found
that this was no light task, and at wheel or lookout he steadily went
over and over his lengthening list of pronunciations and definitions,
while he invariably memorized himself to sleep. “Never did anything,”
“if I were,” and “those things,” were phrases, with many variations,
that he repeated under his breath in order to accustom his tongue to
the language spoken by Ruth. “And” and “ing,” with the “d” and “g”
pronounced emphatically, he went over thousands of times; and to his
surprise he noticed that he was beginning to speak cleaner and more
correct English than the officers themselves and the
gentleman-adventurers in the cabin who had financed the expedition.

The captain was a fishy-eyed Norwegian who somehow had fallen into
possession of a complete Shakespeare, which he never read, and Martin
had washed his clothes for him and in return been permitted access to
the precious volumes. For a time, so steeped was he in the plays and in
the many favorite passages that impressed themselves almost without
effort on his brain, that all the world seemed to shape itself into
forms of Elizabethan tragedy or comedy and his very thoughts were in
blank verse. It trained his ear and gave him a fine appreciation for
noble English; withal it introduced into his mind much that was archaic
and obsolete.

The eight months had been well spent, and, in addition to what he had
learned of right speaking and high thinking, he had learned much of
himself. Along with his humbleness because he knew so little, there
arose a conviction of power. He felt a sharp gradation between himself
and his shipmates, and was wise enough to realize that the difference
lay in potentiality rather than achievement. What he could do,—they
could do; but within him he felt a confused ferment working that told
him there was more in him than he had done. He was tortured by the
exquisite beauty of the world, and wished that Ruth were there to share
it with him. He decided that he would describe to her many of the bits
of South Sea beauty. The creative spirit in him flamed up at the
thought and urged that he recreate this beauty for a wider audience
than Ruth. And then, in splendor and glory, came the great idea. He
would write. He would be one of the eyes through which the world saw,
one of the ears through which it heard, one of the hearts through which
it felt. He would write—everything—poetry and prose, fiction and
description, and plays like Shakespeare. There was career and the way
to win to Ruth. The men of literature were the world’s giants, and he
conceived them to be far finer than the Mr. Butlers who earned thirty
thousand a year and could be Supreme Court justices if they wanted to.

Once the idea had germinated, it mastered him, and the return voyage to
San Francisco was like a dream. He was drunken with unguessed power and
felt that he could do anything. In the midst of the great and lonely
sea he gained perspective. Clearly, and for the first time, he saw Ruth
and her world. It was all visualized in his mind as a concrete thing
which he could take up in his two hands and turn around and about and
examine. There was much that was dim and nebulous in that world, but he
saw it as a whole and not in detail, and he saw, also, the way to
master it. To write! The thought was fire in him. He would begin as
soon as he got back. The first thing he would do would be to describe
the voyage of the treasure-hunters. He would sell it to some San
Francisco newspaper. He would not tell Ruth anything about it, and she
would be surprised and pleased when she saw his name in print. While he
wrote, he could go on studying. There were twenty-four hours in each
day. He was invincible. He knew how to work, and the citadels would go
down before him. He would not have to go to sea again—as a sailor; and
for the instant he caught a vision of a steam yacht. There were other
writers who possessed steam yachts. Of course, he cautioned himself, it
would be slow succeeding at first, and for a time he would be content
to earn enough money by his writing to enable him to go on studying.
And then, after some time,—a very indeterminate time,—when he had
learned and prepared himself, he would write the great things and his
name would be on all men’s lips. But greater than that, infinitely
greater and greatest of all, he would have proved himself worthy of
Ruth. Fame was all very well, but it was for Ruth that his splendid
dream arose. He was not a fame-monger, but merely one of God’s mad
lovers.

Arrived in Oakland, with his snug pay-day in his pocket, he took up his
old room at Bernard Higginbotham’s and set to work. He did not even let
Ruth know he was back. He would go and see her when he finished the
article on the treasure-hunters. It was not so difficult to abstain
from seeing her, because of the violent heat of creative fever that
burned in him. Besides, the very article he was writing would bring her
nearer to him. He did not know how long an article he should write, but
he counted the words in a double-page article in the Sunday supplement
of the _San Francisco Examiner_, and guided himself by that. Three
days, at white heat, completed his narrative; but when he had copied it
carefully, in a large scrawl that was easy to read, he learned from a
rhetoric he picked up in the library that there were such things as
paragraphs and quotation marks. He had never thought of such things
before; and he promptly set to work writing the article over, referring
continually to the pages of the rhetoric and learning more in a day
about composition than the average schoolboy in a year. When he had
copied the article a second time and rolled it up carefully, he read in
a newspaper an item on hints to beginners, and discovered the iron law
that manuscripts should never be rolled and that they should be written
on one side of the paper. He had violated the law on both counts. Also,
he learned from the item that first-class papers paid a minimum of ten
dollars a column. So, while he copied the manuscript a third time, he
consoled himself by multiplying ten columns by ten dollars. The product
was always the same, one hundred dollars, and he decided that that was
better than seafaring. If it hadn’t been for his blunders, he would
have finished the article in three days. One hundred dollars in three
days! It would have taken him three months and longer on the sea to
earn a similar amount. A man was a fool to go to sea when he could
write, he concluded, though the money in itself meant nothing to him.
Its value was in the liberty it would get him, the presentable garments
it would buy him, all of which would bring him nearer, swiftly nearer,
to the slender, pale girl who had turned his life back upon itself and
given him inspiration.

He mailed the manuscript in a flat envelope, and addressed it to the
editor of the _San Francisco Examiner_. He had an idea that anything
accepted by a paper was published immediately, and as he had sent the
manuscript in on Friday he expected it to come out on the following
Sunday. He conceived that it would be fine to let that event apprise
Ruth of his return. Then, Sunday afternoon, he would call and see her.
In the meantime he was occupied by another idea, which he prided
himself upon as being a particularly sane, careful, and modest idea. He
would write an adventure story for boys and sell it to _The Youth’s
Companion_. He went to the free reading-room and looked through the
files of _The Youth’s Companion_. Serial stories, he found, were
usually published in that weekly in five instalments of about three
thousand words each. He discovered several serials that ran to seven
instalments, and decided to write one of that length.

He had been on a whaling voyage in the Arctic, once—a voyage that was
to have been for three years and which had terminated in shipwreck at
the end of six months. While his imagination was fanciful, even
fantastic at times, he had a basic love of reality that compelled him
to write about the things he knew. He knew whaling, and out of the real
materials of his knowledge he proceeded to manufacture the fictitious
adventures of the two boys he intended to use as joint heroes. It was
easy work, he decided on Saturday evening. He had completed on that day
the first instalment of three thousand words—much to the amusement of
Jim, and to the open derision of Mr. Higginbotham, who sneered
throughout meal-time at the “litery” person they had discovered in the
family.

Martin contented himself by picturing his brother-in-law’s surprise on
Sunday morning when he opened his _Examiner_ and saw the article on the
treasure-hunters. Early that morning he was out himself to the front
door, nervously racing through the many-sheeted newspaper. He went
through it a second time, very carefully, then folded it up and left it
where he had found it. He was glad he had not told any one about his
article. On second thought he concluded that he had been wrong about
the speed with which things found their way into newspaper columns.
Besides, there had not been any news value in his article, and most
likely the editor would write to him about it first.

After breakfast he went on with his serial. The words flowed from his
pen, though he broke off from the writing frequently to look up
definitions in the dictionary or to refer to the rhetoric. He often
read or re-read a chapter at a time, during such pauses; and he
consoled himself that while he was not writing the great things he felt
to be in him, he was learning composition, at any rate, and training
himself to shape up and express his thoughts. He toiled on till dark,
when he went out to the reading-room and explored magazines and
weeklies until the place closed at ten o’clock. This was his programme
for a week. Each day he did three thousand words, and each evening he
puzzled his way through the magazines, taking note of the stories,
articles, and poems that editors saw fit to publish. One thing was
certain: What these multitudinous writers did he could do, and only
give him time and he would do what they could not do. He was cheered to
read in _Book News_, in a paragraph on the payment of magazine writers,
not that Rudyard Kipling received a dollar per word, but that the
minimum rate paid by first-class magazines was two cents a word. _The
Youth’s Companion_ was certainly first class, and at that rate the
three thousand words he had written that day would bring him sixty
dollars—two months’ wages on the sea!

On Friday night he finished the serial, twenty-one thousand words long.
At two cents a word, he calculated, that would bring him four hundred
and twenty dollars. Not a bad week’s work. It was more money than he
had ever possessed at one time. He did not know how he could spend it
all. He had tapped a gold mine. Where this came from he could always
get more. He planned to buy some more clothes, to subscribe to many
magazines, and to buy dozens of reference books that at present he was
compelled to go to the library to consult. And still there was a large
portion of the four hundred and twenty dollars unspent. This worried
him until the thought came to him of hiring a servant for Gertrude and
of buying a bicycle for Marian.

He mailed the bulky manuscript to _The Youth’s Companion_, and on
Saturday afternoon, after having planned an article on pearl-diving, he
went to see Ruth. He had telephoned, and she went herself to greet him
at the door. The old familiar blaze of health rushed out from him and
struck her like a blow. It seemed to enter into her body and course
through her veins in a liquid glow, and to set her quivering with its
imparted strength. He flushed warmly as he took her hand and looked
into her blue eyes, but the fresh bronze of eight months of sun hid the
flush, though it did not protect the neck from the gnawing chafe of the
stiff collar. She noted the red line of it with amusement which quickly
vanished as she glanced at his clothes. They really fitted him,—it was
his first made-to-order suit,—and he seemed slimmer and better
modelled. In addition, his cloth cap had been replaced by a soft hat,
which she commanded him to put on and then complimented him on his
appearance. She did not remember when she had felt so happy. This
change in him was her handiwork, and she was proud of it and fired with
ambition further to help him.

But the most radical change of all, and the one that pleased her most,
was the change in his speech. Not only did he speak more correctly, but
he spoke more easily, and there were many new words in his vocabulary.
When he grew excited or enthusiastic, however, he dropped back into the
old slurring and the dropping of final consonants. Also, there was an
awkward hesitancy, at times, as he essayed the new words he had
learned. On the other hand, along with his ease of expression, he
displayed a lightness and facetiousness of thought that delighted her.
It was his old spirit of humor and badinage that had made him a
favorite in his own class, but which he had hitherto been unable to use
in her presence through lack of words and training. He was just
beginning to orientate himself and to feel that he was not wholly an
intruder. But he was very tentative, fastidiously so, letting Ruth set
the pace of sprightliness and fancy, keeping up with her but never
daring to go beyond her.

He told her of what he had been doing, and of his plan to write for a
livelihood and of going on with his studies. But he was disappointed at
her lack of approval. She did not think much of his plan.

“You see,” she said frankly, “writing must be a trade, like anything
else. Not that I know anything about it, of course. I only bring common
judgment to bear. You couldn’t hope to be a blacksmith without spending
three years at learning the trade—or is it five years! Now writers are
so much better paid than blacksmiths that there must be ever so many
more men who would like to write, who—try to write.”

“But then, may not I be peculiarly constituted to write?” he queried,
secretly exulting at the language he had used, his swift imagination
throwing the whole scene and atmosphere upon a vast screen along with a
thousand other scenes from his life—scenes that were rough and raw,
gross and bestial.

The whole composite vision was achieved with the speed of light,
producing no pause in the conversation, nor interrupting his calm train
of thought. On the screen of his imagination he saw himself and this
sweet and beautiful girl, facing each other and conversing in good
English, in a room of books and paintings and tone and culture, and all
illuminated by a bright light of steadfast brilliance; while ranged
about and fading away to the remote edges of the screen were
antithetical scenes, each scene a picture, and he the onlooker, free to
look at will upon what he wished. He saw these other scenes through
drifting vapors and swirls of sullen fog dissolving before shafts of
red and garish light. He saw cowboys at the bar, drinking fierce
whiskey, the air filled with obscenity and ribald language, and he saw
himself with them drinking and cursing with the wildest, or sitting at
table with them, under smoking kerosene lamps, while the chips clicked
and clattered and the cards were dealt around. He saw himself, stripped
to the waist, with naked fists, fighting his great fight with Liverpool
Red in the forecastle of the _Susquehanna_; and he saw the bloody deck
of the _John Rogers_, that gray morning of attempted mutiny, the mate
kicking in death-throes on the main-hatch, the revolver in the old
man’s hand spitting fire and smoke, the men with passion-wrenched
faces, of brutes screaming vile blasphemies and falling about him—and
then he returned to the central scene, calm and clean in the steadfast
light, where Ruth sat and talked with him amid books and paintings; and
he saw the grand piano upon which she would later play to him; and he
heard the echoes of his own selected and correct words, “But then, may
I not be peculiarly constituted to write?”

“But no matter how peculiarly constituted a man may be for
blacksmithing,” she was laughing, “I never heard of one becoming a
blacksmith without first serving his apprenticeship.”

“What would you advise?” he asked. “And don’t forget that I feel in me
this capacity to write—I can’t explain it; I just know that it is in
me.”

“You must get a thorough education,” was the answer, “whether or not
you ultimately become a writer. This education is indispensable for
whatever career you select, and it must not be slipshod or sketchy. You
should go to high school.”

“Yes—” he began; but she interrupted with an afterthought:-

“Of course, you could go on with your writing, too.”

“I would have to,” he said grimly.

“Why?” She looked at him, prettily puzzled, for she did not quite like
the persistence with which he clung to his notion.

“Because, without writing there wouldn’t be any high school. I must
live and buy books and clothes, you know.”

“I’d forgotten that,” she laughed. “Why weren’t you born with an
income?”

“I’d rather have good health and imagination,” he answered. “I can make
good on the income, but the other things have to be made good for—” He
almost said “you,” then amended his sentence to, “have to be made good
for one.”

“Don’t say ‘make good,’” she cried, sweetly petulant. “It’s slang, and
it’s horrid.”

He flushed, and stammered, “That’s right, and I only wish you’d correct
me every time.”

“I—I’d like to,” she said haltingly. “You have so much in you that is
good that I want to see you perfect.”

He was clay in her hands immediately, as passionately desirous of being
moulded by her as she was desirous of shaping him into the image of her
ideal of man. And when she pointed out the opportuneness of the time,
that the entrance examinations to high school began on the following
Monday, he promptly volunteered that he would take them.

Then she played and sang to him, while he gazed with hungry yearning at
her, drinking in her loveliness and marvelling that there should not be
a hundred suitors listening there and longing for her as he listened
and longed.




CHAPTER X.


He stopped to dinner that evening, and, much to Ruth’s satisfaction,
made a favorable impression on her father. They talked about the sea as
a career, a subject which Martin had at his finger-ends, and Mr. Morse
remarked afterward that he seemed a very clear-headed young man. In his
avoidance of slang and his search after right words, Martin was
compelled to talk slowly, which enabled him to find the best thoughts
that were in him. He was more at ease than that first night at dinner,
nearly a year before, and his shyness and modesty even commended him to
Mrs. Morse, who was pleased at his manifest improvement.

“He is the first man that ever drew passing notice from Ruth,” she told
her husband. “She has been so singularly backward where men are
concerned that I have been worried greatly.”

Mr. Morse looked at his wife curiously.

“You mean to use this young sailor to wake her up?” he questioned.

“I mean that she is not to die an old maid if I can help it,” was the
answer. “If this young Eden can arouse her interest in mankind in
general, it will be a good thing.”

“A very good thing,” he commented. “But suppose,—and we must suppose,
sometimes, my dear,—suppose he arouses her interest too particularly in
him?”

“Impossible,” Mrs. Morse laughed. “She is three years older than he,
and, besides, it is impossible. Nothing will ever come of it. Trust
that to me.”

And so Martin’s rôle was arranged for him, while he, led on by Arthur
and Norman, was meditating an extravagance. They were going out for a
ride into the hills Sunday morning on their wheels, which did not
interest Martin until he learned that Ruth, too, rode a wheel and was
going along. He did not ride, nor own a wheel, but if Ruth rode, it was
up to him to begin, was his decision; and when he said good night, he
stopped in at a cyclery on his way home and spent forty dollars for a
wheel. It was more than a month’s hard-earned wages, and it reduced his
stock of money amazingly; but when he added the hundred dollars he was
to receive from the _Examiner_ to the four hundred and twenty dollars
that was the least _The Youth’s Companion_ could pay him, he felt that
he had reduced the perplexity the unwonted amount of money had caused
him. Nor did he mind, in the course of learning to ride the wheel home,
the fact that he ruined his suit of clothes. He caught the tailor by
telephone that night from Mr. Higginbotham’s store and ordered another
suit. Then he carried the wheel up the narrow stairway that clung like
a fire-escape to the rear wall of the building, and when he had moved
his bed out from the wall, found there was just space enough in the
small room for himself and the wheel.

Sunday he had intended to devote to studying for the high school
examination, but the pearl-diving article lured him away, and he spent
the day in the white-hot fever of re-creating the beauty and romance
that burned in him. The fact that the _Examiner_ of that morning had
failed to publish his treasure-hunting article did not dash his
spirits. He was at too great a height for that, and having been deaf to
a twice-repeated summons, he went without the heavy Sunday dinner with
which Mr. Higginbotham invariably graced his table. To Mr. Higginbotham
such a dinner was advertisement of his worldly achievement and
prosperity, and he honored it by delivering platitudinous sermonettes
upon American institutions and the opportunity said institutions gave
to any hard-working man to rise—the rise, in his case, which he pointed
out unfailingly, being from a grocer’s clerk to the ownership of
Higginbotham’s Cash Store.

Martin Eden looked with a sigh at his unfinished “Pearl-diving” on
Monday morning, and took the car down to Oakland to the high school.
And when, days later, he applied for the results of his examinations,
he learned that he had failed in everything save grammar.

“Your grammar is excellent,” Professor Hilton informed him, staring at
him through heavy spectacles; “but you know nothing, positively
nothing, in the other branches, and your United States history is
abominable—there is no other word for it, abominable. I should advise
you—”

Professor Hilton paused and glared at him, unsympathetic and
unimaginative as one of his own test-tubes. He was professor of physics
in the high school, possessor of a large family, a meagre salary, and a
select fund of parrot-learned knowledge.

“Yes, sir,” Martin said humbly, wishing somehow that the man at the
desk in the library was in Professor Hilton’s place just then.

“And I should advise you to go back to the grammar school for at least
two years. Good day.”

Martin was not deeply affected by his failure, though he was surprised
at Ruth’s shocked expression when he told her Professor Hilton’s
advice. Her disappointment was so evident that he was sorry he had
failed, but chiefly so for her sake.

“You see I was right,” she said. “You know far more than any of the
students entering high school, and yet you can’t pass the examinations.
It is because what education you have is fragmentary, sketchy. You need
the discipline of study, such as only skilled teachers can give you.
You must be thoroughly grounded. Professor Hilton is right, and if I
were you, I’d go to night school. A year and a half of it might enable
you to catch up that additional six months. Besides, that would leave
you your days in which to write, or, if you could not make your living
by your pen, you would have your days in which to work in some
position.”

But if my days are taken up with work and my nights with school, when
am I going to see you?—was Martin’s first thought, though he refrained
from uttering it. Instead, he said:-

“It seems so babyish for me to be going to night school. But I wouldn’t
mind that if I thought it would pay. But I don’t think it will pay. I
can do the work quicker than they can teach me. It would be a loss of
time—” he thought of her and his desire to have her—“and I can’t afford
the time. I haven’t the time to spare, in fact.”

“There is so much that is necessary.” She looked at him gently, and he
was a brute to oppose her. “Physics and chemistry—you can’t do them
without laboratory study; and you’ll find algebra and geometry almost
hopeless without instruction. You need the skilled teachers, the
specialists in the art of imparting knowledge.”

He was silent for a minute, casting about for the least vainglorious
way in which to express himself.

“Please don’t think I’m bragging,” he began. “I don’t intend it that
way at all. But I have a feeling that I am what I may call a natural
student. I can study by myself. I take to it kindly, like a duck to
water. You see yourself what I did with grammar. And I’ve learned much
of other things—you would never dream how much. And I’m only getting
started. Wait till I get—” He hesitated and assured himself of the
pronunciation before he said “momentum. I’m getting my first real feel
of things now. I’m beginning to size up the situation—”

“Please don’t say ‘size up,’” she interrupted.

“To get a line on things,” he hastily amended.

“That doesn’t mean anything in correct English,” she objected.

He floundered for a fresh start.

“What I’m driving at is that I’m beginning to get the lay of the land.”

Out of pity she forebore, and he went on.

“Knowledge seems to me like a chart-room. Whenever I go into the
library, I am impressed that way. The part played by teachers is to
teach the student the contents of the chart-room in a systematic way.
The teachers are guides to the chart-room, that’s all. It’s not
something that they have in their own heads. They don’t make it up,
don’t create it. It’s all in the chart-room and they know their way
about in it, and it’s their business to show the place to strangers who
might else get lost. Now I don’t get lost easily. I have the bump of
location. I usually know where I’m at—What’s wrong now?”

“Don’t say ‘where I’m at.’”

“That’s right,” he said gratefully, “where I am. But where am I at—I
mean, where am I? Oh, yes, in the chart-room. Well, some people—”

“Persons,” she corrected.

“Some persons need guides, most persons do; but I think I can get along
without them. I’ve spent a lot of time in the chart-room now, and I’m
on the edge of knowing my way about, what charts I want to refer to,
what coasts I want to explore. And from the way I line it up, I’ll
explore a whole lot more quickly by myself. The speed of a fleet, you
know, is the speed of the slowest ship, and the speed of the teachers
is affected the same way. They can’t go any faster than the ruck of
their scholars, and I can set a faster pace for myself than they set
for a whole schoolroom.”

“‘He travels the fastest who travels alone,’” she quoted at him.

But I’d travel faster with you just the same, was what he wanted to
blurt out, as he caught a vision of a world without end of sunlit
spaces and starry voids through which he drifted with her, his arm
around her, her pale gold hair blowing about his face. In the same
instant he was aware of the pitiful inadequacy of speech. God! If he
could so frame words that she could see what he then saw! And he felt
the stir in him, like a throe of yearning pain, of the desire to paint
these visions that flashed unsummoned on the mirror of his mind. Ah,
that was it! He caught at the hem of the secret. It was the very thing
that the great writers and master-poets did. That was why they were
giants. They knew how to express what they thought, and felt, and saw.
Dogs asleep in the sun often whined and barked, but they were unable to
tell what they saw that made them whine and bark. He had often wondered
what it was. And that was all he was, a dog asleep in the sun. He saw
noble and beautiful visions, but he could only whine and bark at Ruth.
But he would cease sleeping in the sun. He would stand up, with open
eyes, and he would struggle and toil and learn until, with eyes
unblinded and tongue untied, he could share with her his visioned
wealth. Other men had discovered the trick of expression, of making
words obedient servitors, and of making combinations of words mean more
than the sum of their separate meanings. He was stirred profoundly by
the passing glimpse at the secret, and he was again caught up in the
vision of sunlit spaces and starry voids—until it came to him that it
was very quiet, and he saw Ruth regarding him with an amused expression
and a smile in her eyes.

“I have had a great visioning,” he said, and at the sound of his words
in his own ears his heart gave a leap. Where had those words come from?
They had adequately expressed the pause his vision had put in the
conversation. It was a miracle. Never had he so loftily framed a lofty
thought. But never had he attempted to frame lofty thoughts in words.
That was it. That explained it. He had never tried. But Swinburne had,
and Tennyson, and Kipling, and all the other poets. His mind flashed on
to his “Pearl-diving.” He had never dared the big things, the spirit of
the beauty that was a fire in him. That article would be a different
thing when he was done with it. He was appalled by the vastness of the
beauty that rightfully belonged in it, and again his mind flashed and
dared, and he demanded of himself why he could not chant that beauty in
noble verse as the great poets did. And there was all the mysterious
delight and spiritual wonder of his love for Ruth. Why could he not
chant that, too, as the poets did? They had sung of love. So would he.
By God!—

And in his frightened ears he heard his exclamation echoing. Carried
away, he had breathed it aloud. The blood surged into his face, wave
upon wave, mastering the bronze of it till the blush of shame flaunted
itself from collar-rim to the roots of his hair.

“I—I—beg your pardon,” he stammered. “I was thinking.”

“It sounded as if you were praying,” she said bravely, but she felt
herself inside to be withering and shrinking. It was the first time she
had heard an oath from the lips of a man she knew, and she was shocked,
not merely as a matter of principle and training, but shocked in spirit
by this rough blast of life in the garden of her sheltered maidenhood.

But she forgave, and with surprise at the ease of her forgiveness.
Somehow it was not so difficult to forgive him anything. He had not had
a chance to be as other men, and he was trying so hard, and succeeding,
too. It never entered her head that there could be any other reason for
her being kindly disposed toward him. She was tenderly disposed toward
him, but she did not know it. She had no way of knowing it. The placid
poise of twenty-four years without a single love affair did not fit her
with a keen perception of her own feelings, and she who had never
warmed to actual love was unaware that she was warming now.




CHAPTER XI.


Martin went back to his pearl-diving article, which would have been
finished sooner if it had not been broken in upon so frequently by his
attempts to write poetry. His poems were love poems, inspired by Ruth,
but they were never completed. Not in a day could he learn to chant in
noble verse. Rhyme and metre and structure were serious enough in
themselves, but there was, over and beyond them, an intangible and
evasive something that he caught in all great poetry, but which he
could not catch and imprison in his own. It was the elusive spirit of
poetry itself that he sensed and sought after but could not capture. It
seemed a glow to him, a warm and trailing vapor, ever beyond his
reaching, though sometimes he was rewarded by catching at shreds of it
and weaving them into phrases that echoed in his brain with haunting
notes or drifted across his vision in misty wafture of unseen beauty.
It was baffling. He ached with desire to express and could but gibber
prosaically as everybody gibbered. He read his fragments aloud. The
metre marched along on perfect feet, and the rhyme pounded a longer and
equally faultless rhythm, but the glow and high exaltation that he felt
within were lacking. He could not understand, and time and again, in
despair, defeated and depressed, he returned to his article. Prose was
certainly an easier medium.

Following the “Pearl-diving,” he wrote an article on the sea as a
career, another on turtle-catching, and a third on the northeast
trades. Then he tried, as an experiment, a short story, and before he
broke his stride he had finished six short stories and despatched them
to various magazines. He wrote prolifically, intensely, from morning
till night, and late at night, except when he broke off to go to the
reading-room, draw books from the library, or to call on Ruth. He was
profoundly happy. Life was pitched high. He was in a fever that never
broke. The joy of creation that is supposed to belong to the gods was
his. All the life about him—the odors of stale vegetables and soapsuds,
the slatternly form of his sister, and the jeering face of Mr.
Higginbotham—was a dream. The real world was in his mind, and the
stories he wrote were so many pieces of reality out of his mind.

The days were too short. There was so much he wanted to study. He cut
his sleep down to five hours and found that he could get along upon it.
He tried four hours and a half, and regretfully came back to five. He
could joyfully have spent all his waking hours upon any one of his
pursuits. It was with regret that he ceased from writing to study, that
he ceased from study to go to the library, that he tore himself away
from that chart-room of knowledge or from the magazines in the
reading-room that were filled with the secrets of writers who succeeded
in selling their wares. It was like severing heart strings, when he was
with Ruth, to stand up and go; and he scorched through the dark streets
so as to get home to his books at the least possible expense of time.
And hardest of all was it to shut up the algebra or physics, put
note-book and pencil aside, and close his tired eyes in sleep. He hated
the thought of ceasing to live, even for so short a time, and his sole
consolation was that the alarm clock was set five hours ahead. He would
lose only five hours anyway, and then the jangling bell would jerk him
out of unconsciousness and he would have before him another glorious
day of nineteen hours.

In the meantime the weeks were passing, his money was ebbing low, and
there was no money coming in. A month after he had mailed it, the
adventure serial for boys was returned to him by _The Youth’s
Companion_. The rejection slip was so tactfully worded that he felt
kindly toward the editor. But he did not feel so kindly toward the
editor of the _San Francisco Examiner_. After waiting two whole weeks,
Martin had written to him. A week later he wrote again. At the end of
the month, he went over to San Francisco and personally called upon the
editor. But he did not meet that exalted personage, thanks to a
Cerberus of an office boy, of tender years and red hair, who guarded
the portals. At the end of the fifth week the manuscript came back to
him, by mail, without comment. There was no rejection slip, no
explanation, nothing. In the same way his other articles were tied up
with the other leading San Francisco papers. When he recovered them, he
sent them to the magazines in the East, from which they were returned
more promptly, accompanied always by the printed rejection slips.

The short stories were returned in similar fashion. He read them over
and over, and liked them so much that he could not puzzle out the cause
of their rejection, until, one day, he read in a newspaper that
manuscripts should always be typewritten. That explained it. Of course
editors were so busy that they could not afford the time and strain of
reading handwriting. Martin rented a typewriter and spent a day
mastering the machine. Each day he typed what he composed, and he typed
his earlier manuscripts as fast as they were returned him. He was
surprised when the typed ones began to come back. His jaw seemed to
become squarer, his chin more aggressive, and he bundled the
manuscripts off to new editors.

The thought came to him that he was not a good judge of his own work.
He tried it out on Gertrude. He read his stories aloud to her. Her eyes
glistened, and she looked at him proudly as she said:-

“Ain’t it grand, you writin’ those sort of things.”

“Yes, yes,” he demanded impatiently. “But the story—how did you like
it?”

“Just grand,” was the reply. “Just grand, an’ thrilling, too. I was all
worked up.”

He could see that her mind was not clear. The perplexity was strong in
her good-natured face. So he waited.

“But, say, Mart,” after a long pause, “how did it end? Did that young
man who spoke so highfalutin’ get her?”

And, after he had explained the end, which he thought he had made
artistically obvious, she would say:-

“That’s what I wanted to know. Why didn’t you write that way in the
story?”

One thing he learned, after he had read her a number of stories,
namely, that she liked happy endings.

“That story was perfectly grand,” she announced, straightening up from
the wash-tub with a tired sigh and wiping the sweat from her forehead
with a red, steamy hand; “but it makes me sad. I want to cry. There is
too many sad things in the world anyway. It makes me happy to think
about happy things. Now if he’d married her, and—You don’t mind, Mart?”
she queried apprehensively. “I just happen to feel that way, because
I’m tired, I guess. But the story was grand just the same, perfectly
grand. Where are you goin’ to sell it?”

“That’s a horse of another color,” he laughed.

“But if you _did_ sell it, what do you think you’d get for it?”

“Oh, a hundred dollars. That would be the least, the way prices go.”

“My! I do hope you’ll sell it!”

“Easy money, eh?” Then he added proudly: “I wrote it in two days.
That’s fifty dollars a day.”

He longed to read his stories to Ruth, but did not dare. He would wait
till some were published, he decided, then she would understand what he
had been working for. In the meantime he toiled on. Never had the
spirit of adventure lured him more strongly than on this amazing
exploration of the realm of mind. He bought the text-books on physics
and chemistry, and, along with his algebra, worked out problems and
demonstrations. He took the laboratory proofs on faith, and his intense
power of vision enabled him to see the reactions of chemicals more
understandingly than the average student saw them in the laboratory.
Martin wandered on through the heavy pages, overwhelmed by the clews he
was getting to the nature of things. He had accepted the world as the
world, but now he was comprehending the organization of it, the play
and interplay of force and matter. Spontaneous explanations of old
matters were continually arising in his mind. Levers and purchases
fascinated him, and his mind roved backward to hand-spikes and blocks
and tackles at sea. The theory of navigation, which enabled the ships
to travel unerringly their courses over the pathless ocean, was made
clear to him. The mysteries of storm, and rain, and tide were revealed,
and the reason for the existence of trade-winds made him wonder whether
he had written his article on the northeast trade too soon. At any rate
he knew he could write it better now. One afternoon he went out with
Arthur to the University of California, and, with bated breath and a
feeling of religious awe, went through the laboratories, saw
demonstrations, and listened to a physics professor lecturing to his
classes.

But he did not neglect his writing. A stream of short stories flowed
from his pen, and he branched out into the easier forms of verse—the
kind he saw printed in the magazines—though he lost his head and wasted
two weeks on a tragedy in blank verse, the swift rejection of which, by
half a dozen magazines, dumfounded him. Then he discovered Henley and
wrote a series of sea-poems on the model of “Hospital Sketches.” They
were simple poems, of light and color, and romance and adventure. “Sea
Lyrics,” he called them, and he judged them to be the best work he had
yet done. There were thirty, and he completed them in a month, doing
one a day after having done his regular day’s work on fiction, which
day’s work was the equivalent to a week’s work of the average
successful writer. The toil meant nothing to him. It was not toil. He
was finding speech, and all the beauty and wonder that had been pent
for years behind his inarticulate lips was now pouring forth in a wild
and virile flood.

He showed the “Sea Lyrics” to no one, not even to the editors. He had
become distrustful of editors. But it was not distrust that prevented
him from submitting the “Lyrics.” They were so beautiful to him that he
was impelled to save them to share with Ruth in some glorious, far-off
time when he would dare to read to her what he had written. Against
that time he kept them with him, reading them aloud, going over them
until he knew them by heart.

He lived every moment of his waking hours, and he lived in his sleep,
his subjective mind rioting through his five hours of surcease and
combining the thoughts and events of the day into grotesque and
impossible marvels. In reality, he never rested, and a weaker body or a
less firmly poised brain would have been prostrated in a general
break-down. His late afternoon calls on Ruth were rarer now, for June
was approaching, when she would take her degree and finish with the
university. Bachelor of Arts!—when he thought of her degree, it seemed
she fled beyond him faster than he could pursue.

One afternoon a week she gave to him, and arriving late, he usually
stayed for dinner and for music afterward. Those were his red-letter
days. The atmosphere of the house, in such contrast with that in which
he lived, and the mere nearness to her, sent him forth each time with a
firmer grip on his resolve to climb the heights. In spite of the beauty
in him, and the aching desire to create, it was for her that he
struggled. He was a lover first and always. All other things he
subordinated to love.

Greater than his adventure in the world of thought was his
love-adventure. The world itself was not so amazing because of the
atoms and molecules that composed it according to the propulsions of
irresistible force; what made it amazing was the fact that Ruth lived
in it. She was the most amazing thing he had ever known, or dreamed, or
guessed.

But he was oppressed always by her remoteness. She was so far from him,
and he did not know how to approach her. He had been a success with
girls and women in his own class; but he had never loved any of them,
while he did love her, and besides, she was not merely of another
class. His very love elevated her above all classes. She was a being
apart, so far apart that he did not know how to draw near to her as a
lover should draw near. It was true, as he acquired knowledge and
language, that he was drawing nearer, talking her speech, discovering
ideas and delights in common; but this did not satisfy his lover’s
yearning. His lover’s imagination had made her holy, too holy, too
spiritualized, to have any kinship with him in the flesh. It was his
own love that thrust her from him and made her seem impossible for him.
Love itself denied him the one thing that it desired.

And then, one day, without warning, the gulf between them was bridged
for a moment, and thereafter, though the gulf remained, it was ever
narrower. They had been eating cherries—great, luscious, black cherries
with a juice of the color of dark wine. And later, as she read aloud to
him from “The Princess,” he chanced to notice the stain of the cherries
on her lips. For the moment her divinity was shattered. She was clay,
after all, mere clay, subject to the common law of clay as his clay was
subject, or anybody’s clay. Her lips were flesh like his, and cherries
dyed them as cherries dyed his. And if so with her lips, then was it so
with all of her. She was woman, all woman, just like any woman. It came
upon him abruptly. It was a revelation that stunned him. It was as if
he had seen the sun fall out of the sky, or had seen worshipped purity
polluted.

Then he realized the significance of it, and his heart began pounding
and challenging him to play the lover with this woman who was not a
spirit from other worlds but a mere woman with lips a cherry could
stain. He trembled at the audacity of his thought; but all his soul was
singing, and reason, in a triumphant paean, assured him he was right.
Something of this change in him must have reached her, for she paused
from her reading, looked up at him, and smiled. His eyes dropped from
her blue eyes to her lips, and the sight of the stain maddened him. His
arms all but flashed out to her and around her, in the way of his old
careless life. She seemed to lean toward him, to wait, and all his will
fought to hold him back.

“You were not following a word,” she pouted.

Then she laughed at him, delighting in his confusion, and as he looked
into her frank eyes and knew that she had divined nothing of what he
felt, he became abashed. He had indeed in thought dared too far. Of all
the women he had known there was no woman who would not have
guessed—save her. And she had not guessed. There was the difference.
She was different. He was appalled by his own grossness, awed by her
clear innocence, and he gazed again at her across the gulf. The bridge
had broken down.

But still the incident had brought him nearer. The memory of it
persisted, and in the moments when he was most cast down, he dwelt upon
it eagerly. The gulf was never again so wide. He had accomplished a
distance vastly greater than a bachelorship of arts, or a dozen
bachelorships. She was pure, it was true, as he had never dreamed of
purity; but cherries stained her lips. She was subject to the laws of
the universe just as inexorably as he was. She had to eat to live, and
when she got her feet wet, she caught cold. But that was not the point.
If she could feel hunger and thirst, and heat and cold, then could she
feel love—and love for a man. Well, he was a man. And why could he not
be the man? “It’s up to me to make good,” he would murmur fervently. “I
will be _the_ man. I will make myself _the_ man. I will make good.”




CHAPTER XII.


Early one evening, struggling with a sonnet that twisted all awry the
beauty and thought that trailed in glow and vapor through his brain,
Martin was called to the telephone.

“It’s a lady’s voice, a fine lady’s,” Mr. Higginbotham, who had called
him, jeered.

Martin went to the telephone in the corner of the room, and felt a wave
of warmth rush through him as he heard Ruth’s voice. In his battle with
the sonnet he had forgotten her existence, and at the sound of her
voice his love for her smote him like a sudden blow. And such a
voice!—delicate and sweet, like a strain of music heard far off and
faint, or, better, like a bell of silver, a perfect tone, crystal-pure.
No mere woman had a voice like that. There was something celestial
about it, and it came from other worlds. He could scarcely hear what it
said, so ravished was he, though he controlled his face, for he knew
that Mr. Higginbotham’s ferret eyes were fixed upon him.

It was not much that Ruth wanted to say—merely that Norman had been
going to take her to a lecture that night, but that he had a headache,
and she was so disappointed, and she had the tickets, and that if he
had no other engagement, would he be good enough to take her?

Would he! He fought to suppress the eagerness in his voice. It was
amazing. He had always seen her in her own house. And he had never
dared to ask her to go anywhere with him. Quite irrelevantly, still at
the telephone and talking with her, he felt an overpowering desire to
die for her, and visions of heroic sacrifice shaped and dissolved in
his whirling brain. He loved her so much, so terribly, so hopelessly.
In that moment of mad happiness that she should go out with him, go to
a lecture with him—with him, Martin Eden—she soared so far above him
that there seemed nothing else for him to do than die for her. It was
the only fit way in which he could express the tremendous and lofty
emotion he felt for her. It was the sublime abnegation of true love
that comes to all lovers, and it came to him there, at the telephone,
in a whirlwind of fire and glory; and to die for her, he felt, was to
have lived and loved well. And he was only twenty-one, and he had never
been in love before.

His hand trembled as he hung up the receiver, and he was weak from the
organ which had stirred him. His eyes were shining like an angel’s, and
his face was transfigured, purged of all earthly dross, and pure and
holy.

“Makin’ dates outside, eh?” his brother-in-law sneered. “You know what
that means. You’ll be in the police court yet.”

But Martin could not come down from the height. Not even the bestiality
of the allusion could bring him back to earth. Anger and hurt were
beneath him. He had seen a great vision and was as a god, and he could
feel only profound and awful pity for this maggot of a man. He did not
look at him, and though his eyes passed over him, he did not see him;
and as in a dream he passed out of the room to dress. It was not until
he had reached his own room and was tying his necktie that he became
aware of a sound that lingered unpleasantly in his ears. On
investigating this sound he identified it as the final snort of Bernard
Higginbotham, which somehow had not penetrated to his brain before.

As Ruth’s front door closed behind them and he came down the steps with
her, he found himself greatly perturbed. It was not unalloyed bliss,
taking her to the lecture. He did not know what he ought to do. He had
seen, on the streets, with persons of her class, that the women took
the men’s arms. But then, again, he had seen them when they didn’t; and
he wondered if it was only in the evening that arms were taken, or only
between husbands and wives and relatives.

Just before he reached the sidewalk, he remembered Minnie. Minnie had
always been a stickler. She had called him down the second time she
walked out with him, because he had gone along on the inside, and she
had laid the law down to him that a gentleman always walked on the
outside—when he was with a lady. And Minnie had made a practice of
kicking his heels, whenever they crossed from one side of the street to
the other, to remind him to get over on the outside. He wondered where
she had got that item of etiquette, and whether it had filtered down
from above and was all right.

It wouldn’t do any harm to try it, he decided, by the time they had
reached the sidewalk; and he swung behind Ruth and took up his station
on the outside. Then the other problem presented itself. Should he
offer her his arm? He had never offered anybody his arm in his life.
The girls he had known never took the fellows’ arms. For the first
several times they walked freely, side by side, and after that it was
arms around the waists, and heads against the fellows’ shoulders where
the streets were unlighted. But this was different. She wasn’t that
kind of a girl. He must do something.

He crooked the arm next to her—crooked it very slightly and with secret
tentativeness, not invitingly, but just casually, as though he was
accustomed to walk that way. And then the wonderful thing happened. He
felt her hand upon his arm. Delicious thrills ran through him at the
contact, and for a few sweet moments it seemed that he had left the
solid earth and was flying with her through the air. But he was soon
back again, perturbed by a new complication. They were crossing the
street. This would put him on the inside. He should be on the outside.
Should he therefore drop her arm and change over? And if he did so,
would he have to repeat the manoeuvre the next time? And the next?
There was something wrong about it, and he resolved not to caper about
and play the fool. Yet he was not satisfied with his conclusion, and
when he found himself on the inside, he talked quickly and earnestly,
making a show of being carried away by what he was saying, so that, in
case he was wrong in not changing sides, his enthusiasm would seem the
cause for his carelessness.

As they crossed Broadway, he came face to face with a new problem. In
the blaze of the electric lights, he saw Lizzie Connolly and her giggly
friend. Only for an instant he hesitated, then his hand went up and his
hat came off. He could not be disloyal to his kind, and it was to more
than Lizzie Connolly that his hat was lifted. She nodded and looked at
him boldly, not with soft and gentle eyes like Ruth’s, but with eyes
that were handsome and hard, and that swept on past him to Ruth and
itemized her face and dress and station. And he was aware that Ruth
looked, too, with quick eyes that were timid and mild as a dove’s, but
which saw, in a look that was a flutter on and past, the working-class
girl in her cheap finery and under the strange hat that all
working-class girls were wearing just then.

“What a pretty girl!” Ruth said a moment later.

Martin could have blessed her, though he said:-

“I don’t know. I guess it’s all a matter of personal taste, but she
doesn’t strike me as being particularly pretty.”

“Why, there isn’t one woman in ten thousand with features as regular as
hers. They are splendid. Her face is as clear-cut as a cameo. And her
eyes are beautiful.”

“Do you think so?” Martin queried absently, for to him there was only
one beautiful woman in the world, and she was beside him, her hand upon
his arm.

“Do I think so? If that girl had proper opportunity to dress, Mr. Eden,
and if she were taught how to carry herself, you would be fairly
dazzled by her, and so would all men.”

“She would have to be taught how to speak,” he commented, “or else most
of the men wouldn’t understand her. I’m sure you couldn’t understand a
quarter of what she said if she just spoke naturally.”

“Nonsense! You are as bad as Arthur when you try to make your point.”

“You forget how I talked when you first met me. I have learned a new
language since then. Before that time I talked as that girl talks. Now
I can manage to make myself understood sufficiently in your language to
explain that you do not know that other girl’s language. And do you
know why she carries herself the way she does? I think about such
things now, though I never used to think about them, and I am beginning
to understand—much.”

“But why does she?”

“She has worked long hours for years at machines. When one’s body is
young, it is very pliable, and hard work will mould it like putty
according to the nature of the work. I can tell at a glance the trades
of many workingmen I meet on the street. Look at me. Why am I rolling
all about the shop? Because of the years I put in on the sea. If I’d
put in the same years cow-punching, with my body young and pliable, I
wouldn’t be rolling now, but I’d be bow-legged. And so with that girl.
You noticed that her eyes were what I might call hard. She has never
been sheltered. She has had to take care of herself, and a young girl
can’t take care of herself and keep her eyes soft and gentle like—like
yours, for example.”

“I think you are right,” Ruth said in a low voice. “And it is too bad.
She is such a pretty girl.”

He looked at her and saw her eyes luminous with pity. And then he
remembered that he loved her and was lost in amazement at his fortune
that permitted him to love her and to take her on his arm to a lecture.

Who are you, Martin Eden? he demanded of himself in the looking-glass,
that night when he got back to his room. He gazed at himself long and
curiously. Who are you? What are you? Where do you belong? You belong
by rights to girls like Lizzie Connolly. You belong with the legions of
toil, with all that is low, and vulgar, and unbeautiful. You belong
with the oxen and the drudges, in dirty surroundings among smells and
stenches. There are the stale vegetables now. Those potatoes are
rotting. Smell them, damn you, smell them. And yet you dare to open the
books, to listen to beautiful music, to learn to love beautiful
paintings, to speak good English, to think thoughts that none of your
own kind thinks, to tear yourself away from the oxen and the Lizzie
Connollys and to love a pale spirit of a woman who is a million miles
beyond you and who lives in the stars! Who are you? and what are you?
damn you! And are you going to make good?

He shook his fist at himself in the glass, and sat down on the edge of
the bed to dream for a space with wide eyes. Then he got out note-book
and algebra and lost himself in quadratic equations, while the hours
slipped by, and the stars dimmed, and the gray of dawn flooded against
his window.




CHAPTER XIII.


It was the knot of wordy socialists and working-class philosophers that
held forth in the City Hall Park on warm afternoons that was
responsible for the great discovery. Once or twice in the month, while
riding through the park on his way to the library, Martin dismounted
from his wheel and listened to the arguments, and each time he tore
himself away reluctantly. The tone of discussion was much lower than at
Mr. Morse’s table. The men were not grave and dignified. They lost
their tempers easily and called one another names, while oaths and
obscene allusions were frequent on their lips. Once or twice he had
seen them come to blows. And yet, he knew not why, there seemed
something vital about the stuff of these men’s thoughts. Their
logomachy was far more stimulating to his intellect than the reserved
and quiet dogmatism of Mr. Morse. These men, who slaughtered English,
gesticulated like lunatics, and fought one another’s ideas with
primitive anger, seemed somehow to be more alive than Mr. Morse and his
crony, Mr. Butler.

Martin had heard Herbert Spencer quoted several times in the park, but
one afternoon a disciple of Spencer’s appeared, a seedy tramp with a
dirty coat buttoned tightly at the throat to conceal the absence of a
shirt. Battle royal was waged, amid the smoking of many cigarettes and
the expectoration of much tobacco-juice, wherein the tramp successfully
held his own, even when a socialist workman sneered, “There is no god
but the Unknowable, and Herbert Spencer is his prophet.” Martin was
puzzled as to what the discussion was about, but when he rode on to the
library he carried with him a new-born interest in Herbert Spencer, and
because of the frequency with which the tramp had mentioned “First
Principles,” Martin drew out that volume.

So the great discovery began. Once before he had tried Spencer, and
choosing the “Principles of Psychology” to begin with, he had failed as
abjectly as he had failed with Madam Blavatsky. There had been no
understanding the book, and he had returned it unread. But this night,
after algebra and physics, and an attempt at a sonnet, he got into bed
and opened “First Principles.” Morning found him still reading. It was
impossible for him to sleep. Nor did he write that day. He lay on the
bed till his body grew tired, when he tried the hard floor, reading on
his back, the book held in the air above him, or changing from side to
side. He slept that night, and did his writing next morning, and then
the book tempted him and he fell, reading all afternoon, oblivious to
everything and oblivious to the fact that that was the afternoon Ruth
gave to him. His first consciousness of the immediate world about him
was when Bernard Higginbotham jerked open the door and demanded to know
if he thought they were running a restaurant.

Martin Eden had been mastered by curiosity all his days. He wanted to
know, and it was this desire that had sent him adventuring over the
world. But he was now learning from Spencer that he never had known,
and that he never could have known had he continued his sailing and
wandering forever. He had merely skimmed over the surface of things,
observing detached phenomena, accumulating fragments of facts, making
superficial little generalizations—and all and everything quite
unrelated in a capricious and disorderly world of whim and chance. The
mechanism of the flight of birds he had watched and reasoned about with
understanding; but it had never entered his head to try to explain the
process whereby birds, as organic flying mechanisms, had been
developed. He had never dreamed there was such a process. That birds
should have come to be, was unguessed. They always had been. They just
happened.

And as it was with birds, so had it been with everything. His ignorant
and unprepared attempts at philosophy had been fruitless. The medieval
metaphysics of Kant had given him the key to nothing, and had served
the sole purpose of making him doubt his own intellectual powers. In
similar manner his attempt to study evolution had been confined to a
hopelessly technical volume by Romanes. He had understood nothing, and
the only idea he had gathered was that evolution was a dry-as-dust
theory, of a lot of little men possessed of huge and unintelligible
vocabularies. And now he learned that evolution was no mere theory but
an accepted process of development; that scientists no longer disagreed
about it, their only differences being over the method of evolution.

And here was the man Spencer, organizing all knowledge for him,
reducing everything to unity, elaborating ultimate realities, and
presenting to his startled gaze a universe so concrete of realization
that it was like the model of a ship such as sailors make and put into
glass bottles. There was no caprice, no chance. All was law. It was in
obedience to law that the bird flew, and it was in obedience to the
same law that fermenting slime had writhed and squirmed and put out
legs and wings and become a bird.

Martin had ascended from pitch to pitch of intellectual living, and
here he was at a higher pitch than ever. All the hidden things were
laying their secrets bare. He was drunken with comprehension. At night,
asleep, he lived with the gods in colossal nightmare; and awake, in the
day, he went around like a somnambulist, with absent stare, gazing upon
the world he had just discovered. At table he failed to hear the
conversation about petty and ignoble things, his eager mind seeking out
and following cause and effect in everything before him. In the meat on
the platter he saw the shining sun and traced its energy back through
all its transformations to its source a hundred million miles away, or
traced its energy ahead to the moving muscles in his arms that enabled
him to cut the meat, and to the brain wherewith he willed the muscles
to move to cut the meat, until, with inward gaze, he saw the same sun
shining in his brain. He was entranced by illumination, and did not
hear the “Bughouse,” whispered by Jim, nor see the anxiety on his
sister’s face, nor notice the rotary motion of Bernard Higginbotham’s
finger, whereby he imparted the suggestion of wheels revolving in his
brother-in-law’s head.

What, in a way, most profoundly impressed Martin, was the correlation
of knowledge—of all knowledge. He had been curious to know things, and
whatever he acquired he had filed away in separate memory compartments
in his brain. Thus, on the subject of sailing he had an immense store.
On the subject of woman he had a fairly large store. But these two
subjects had been unrelated. Between the two memory compartments there
had been no connection. That, in the fabric of knowledge, there should
be any connection whatever between a woman with hysterics and a
schooner carrying a weather-helm or heaving to in a gale, would have
struck him as ridiculous and impossible. But Herbert Spencer had shown
him not only that it was not ridiculous, but that it was impossible for
there to be no connection. All things were related to all other things
from the farthermost star in the wastes of space to the myriads of
atoms in the grain of sand under one’s foot. This new concept was a
perpetual amazement to Martin, and he found himself engaged continually
in tracing the relationship between all things under the sun and on the
other side of the sun. He drew up lists of the most incongruous things
and was unhappy until he succeeded in establishing kinship between them
all—kinship between love, poetry, earthquake, fire, rattlesnakes,
rainbows, precious gems, monstrosities, sunsets, the roaring of lions,
illuminating gas, cannibalism, beauty, murder, lovers, fulcrums, and
tobacco. Thus, he unified the universe and held it up and looked at it,
or wandered through its byways and alleys and jungles, not as a
terrified traveller in the thick of mysteries seeking an unknown goal,
but observing and charting and becoming familiar with all there was to
know. And the more he knew, the more passionately he admired the
universe, and life, and his own life in the midst of it all.

“You fool!” he cried at his image in the looking-glass. “You wanted to
write, and you tried to write, and you had nothing in you to write
about. What did you have in you?—some childish notions, a few
half-baked sentiments, a lot of undigested beauty, a great black mass
of ignorance, a heart filled to bursting with love, and an ambition as
big as your love and as futile as your ignorance. And you wanted to
write! Why, you’re just on the edge of beginning to get something in
you to write about. You wanted to create beauty, but how could you when
you knew nothing about the nature of beauty? You wanted to write about
life when you knew nothing of the essential characteristics of life.
You wanted to write about the world and the scheme of existence when
the world was a Chinese puzzle to you and all that you could have
written would have been about what you did not know of the scheme of
existence. But cheer up, Martin, my boy. You’ll write yet. You know a
little, a very little, and you’re on the right road now to know more.
Some day, if you’re lucky, you may come pretty close to knowing all
that may be known. Then you will write.”

He brought his great discovery to Ruth, sharing with her all his joy
and wonder in it. But she did not seem to be so enthusiastic over it.
She tacitly accepted it and, in a way, seemed aware of it from her own
studies. It did not stir her deeply, as it did him, and he would have
been surprised had he not reasoned it out that it was not new and fresh
to her as it was to him. Arthur and Norman, he found, believed in
evolution and had read Spencer, though it did not seem to have made any
vital impression upon them, while the young fellow with the glasses and
the mop of hair, Will Olney, sneered disagreeably at Spencer and
repeated the epigram, “There is no god but the Unknowable, and Herbert
Spencer is his prophet.”

But Martin forgave him the sneer, for he had begun to discover that
Olney was not in love with Ruth. Later, he was dumfounded to learn from
various little happenings not only that Olney did not care for Ruth,
but that he had a positive dislike for her. Martin could not understand
this. It was a bit of phenomena that he could not correlate with all
the rest of the phenomena in the universe. But nevertheless he felt
sorry for the young fellow because of the great lack in his nature that
prevented him from a proper appreciation of Ruth’s fineness and beauty.
They rode out into the hills several Sundays on their wheels, and
Martin had ample opportunity to observe the armed truce that existed
between Ruth and Olney. The latter chummed with Norman, throwing Arthur
and Martin into company with Ruth, for which Martin was duly grateful.

Those Sundays were great days for Martin, greatest because he was with
Ruth, and great, also, because they were putting him more on a par with
the young men of her class. In spite of their long years of disciplined
education, he was finding himself their intellectual equal, and the
hours spent with them in conversation was so much practice for him in
the use of the grammar he had studied so hard. He had abandoned the
etiquette books, falling back upon observation to show him the right
things to do. Except when carried away by his enthusiasm, he was always
on guard, keenly watchful of their actions and learning their little
courtesies and refinements of conduct.

The fact that Spencer was very little read was for some time a source
of surprise to Martin. “Herbert Spencer,” said the man at the desk in
the library, “oh, yes, a great mind.” But the man did not seem to know
anything of the content of that great mind. One evening, at dinner,
when Mr. Butler was there, Martin turned the conversation upon Spencer.
Mr. Morse bitterly arraigned the English philosopher’s agnosticism, but
confessed that he had not read “First Principles”; while Mr. Butler
stated that he had no patience with Spencer, had never read a line of
him, and had managed to get along quite well without him. Doubts arose
in Martin’s mind, and had he been less strongly individual he would
have accepted the general opinion and given Herbert Spencer up. As it
was, he found Spencer’s explanation of things convincing; and, as he
phrased it to himself, to give up Spencer would be equivalent to a
navigator throwing the compass and chronometer overboard. So Martin
went on into a thorough study of evolution, mastering more and more the
subject himself, and being convinced by the corroborative testimony of
a thousand independent writers. The more he studied, the more vistas he
caught of fields of knowledge yet unexplored, and the regret that days
were only twenty-four hours long became a chronic complaint with him.

One day, because the days were so short, he decided to give up algebra
and geometry. Trigonometry he had not even attempted. Then he cut
chemistry from his study-list, retaining only physics.

“I am not a specialist,” he said, in defence, to Ruth. “Nor am I going
to try to be a specialist. There are too many special fields for any
one man, in a whole lifetime, to master a tithe of them. I must pursue
general knowledge. When I need the work of specialists, I shall refer
to their books.”

“But that is not like having the knowledge yourself,” she protested.

“But it is unnecessary to have it. We profit from the work of the
specialists. That’s what they are for. When I came in, I noticed the
chimney-sweeps at work. They’re specialists, and when they get done,
you will enjoy clean chimneys without knowing anything about the
construction of chimneys.”

“That’s far-fetched, I am afraid.”

She looked at him curiously, and he felt a reproach in her gaze and
manner. But he was convinced of the rightness of his position.

“All thinkers on general subjects, the greatest minds in the world, in
fact, rely on the specialists. Herbert Spencer did that. He generalized
upon the findings of thousands of investigators. He would have had to
live a thousand lives in order to do it all himself. And so with
Darwin. He took advantage of all that had been learned by the florists
and cattle-breeders.”

“You’re right, Martin,” Olney said. “You know what you’re after, and
Ruth doesn’t. She doesn’t know what she is after for herself even.”

“—Oh, yes,” Olney rushed on, heading off her objection, “I know you
call it general culture. But it doesn’t matter what you study if you
want general culture. You can study French, or you can study German, or
cut them both out and study Esperanto, you’ll get the culture tone just
the same. You can study Greek or Latin, too, for the same purpose,
though it will never be any use to you. It will be culture, though.
Why, Ruth studied Saxon, became clever in it,—that was two years
ago,—and all that she remembers of it now is ‘Whan that sweet Aprile
with his schowers soote’—isn’t that the way it goes?”

“But it’s given you the culture tone just the same,” he laughed, again
heading her off. “I know. We were in the same classes.”

“But you speak of culture as if it should be a means to something,”
Ruth cried out. Her eyes were flashing, and in her cheeks were two
spots of color. “Culture is the end in itself.”

“But that is not what Martin wants.”

“How do you know?”

“What do you want, Martin?” Olney demanded, turning squarely upon him.

Martin felt very uncomfortable, and looked entreaty at Ruth.

“Yes, what do you want?” Ruth asked. “That will settle it.”

“Yes, of course, I want culture,” Martin faltered. “I love beauty, and
culture will give me a finer and keener appreciation of beauty.”

She nodded her head and looked triumph.

“Rot, and you know it,” was Olney’s comment. “Martin’s after career,
not culture. It just happens that culture, in his case, is incidental
to career. If he wanted to be a chemist, culture would be unnecessary.
Martin wants to write, but he’s afraid to say so because it will put
you in the wrong.”

“And why does Martin want to write?” he went on. “Because he isn’t
rolling in wealth. Why do you fill your head with Saxon and general
culture? Because you don’t have to make your way in the world. Your
father sees to that. He buys your clothes for you, and all the rest.
What rotten good is our education, yours and mine and Arthur’s and
Norman’s? We’re soaked in general culture, and if our daddies went
broke to-day, we’d be falling down to-morrow on teachers’ examinations.
The best job you could get, Ruth, would be a country school or music
teacher in a girls’ boarding-school.”

“And pray what would you do?” she asked.

“Not a blessed thing. I could earn a dollar and a half a day, common
labor, and I might get in as instructor in Hanley’s cramming joint—I
say might, mind you, and I might be chucked out at the end of the week
for sheer inability.”

Martin followed the discussion closely, and while he was convinced that
Olney was right, he resented the rather cavalier treatment he accorded
Ruth. A new conception of love formed in his mind as he listened.
Reason had nothing to do with love. It mattered not whether the woman
he loved reasoned correctly or incorrectly. Love was above reason. If
it just happened that she did not fully appreciate his necessity for a
career, that did not make her a bit less lovable. She was all lovable,
and what she thought had nothing to do with her lovableness.

“What’s that?” he replied to a question from Olney that broke in upon
his train of thought.

“I was saying that I hoped you wouldn’t be fool enough to tackle
Latin.”

“But Latin is more than culture,” Ruth broke in. “It is equipment.”

“Well, are you going to tackle it?” Olney persisted.

Martin was sore beset. He could see that Ruth was hanging eagerly upon
his answer.

“I am afraid I won’t have time,” he said finally. “I’d like to, but I
won’t have time.”

“You see, Martin’s not seeking culture,” Olney exulted. “He’s trying to
get somewhere, to do something.”

“Oh, but it’s mental training. It’s mind discipline. It’s what makes
disciplined minds.” Ruth looked expectantly at Martin, as if waiting
for him to change his judgment. “You know, the foot-ball players have
to train before the big game. And that is what Latin does for the
thinker. It trains.”

“Rot and bosh! That’s what they told us when we were kids. But there is
one thing they didn’t tell us then. They let us find it out for
ourselves afterwards.” Olney paused for effect, then added, “And what
they didn’t tell us was that every gentleman should have studied Latin,
but that no gentleman should know Latin.”

“Now that’s unfair,” Ruth cried. “I knew you were turning the
conversation just in order to get off something.”

“It’s clever all right,” was the retort, “but it’s fair, too. The only
men who know their Latin are the apothecaries, the lawyers, and the
Latin professors. And if Martin wants to be one of them, I miss my
guess. But what’s all that got to do with Herbert Spencer anyway?
Martin’s just discovered Spencer, and he’s wild over him. Why? Because
Spencer is taking him somewhere. Spencer couldn’t take me anywhere, nor
you. We haven’t got anywhere to go. You’ll get married some day, and
I’ll have nothing to do but keep track of the lawyers and business
agents who will take care of the money my father’s going to leave me.”

Onley got up to go, but turned at the door and delivered a parting
shot.

“You leave Martin alone, Ruth. He knows what’s best for himself. Look
at what he’s done already. He makes me sick sometimes, sick and ashamed
of myself. He knows more now about the world, and life, and man’s
place, and all the rest, than Arthur, or Norman, or I, or you, too, for
that matter, and in spite of all our Latin, and French, and Saxon, and
culture.”

“But Ruth is my teacher,” Martin answered chivalrously. “She is
responsible for what little I have learned.”

“Rats!” Olney looked at Ruth, and his expression was malicious. “I
suppose you’ll be telling me next that you read Spencer on her
recommendation—only you didn’t. And she doesn’t know anything more
about Darwin and evolution than I do about King Solomon’s mines. What’s
that jawbreaker definition about something or other, of Spencer’s, that
you sprang on us the other day—that indefinite, incoherent homogeneity
thing? Spring it on her, and see if she understands a word of it. That
isn’t culture, you see. Well, tra la, and if you tackle Latin, Martin,
I won’t have any respect for you.”

And all the while, interested in the discussion, Martin had been aware
of an irk in it as well. It was about studies and lessons, dealing with
the rudiments of knowledge, and the schoolboyish tone of it conflicted
with the big things that were stirring in him—with the grip upon life
that was even then crooking his fingers like eagle’s talons, with the
cosmic thrills that made him ache, and with the inchoate consciousness
of mastery of it all. He likened himself to a poet, wrecked on the
shores of a strange land, filled with power of beauty, stumbling and
stammering and vainly trying to sing in the rough, barbaric tongue of
his brethren in the new land. And so with him. He was alive, painfully
alive, to the great universal things, and yet he was compelled to
potter and grope among schoolboy topics and debate whether or not he
should study Latin.

“What in hell has Latin to do with it?” he demanded before his mirror
that night. “I wish dead people would stay dead. Why should I and the
beauty in me be ruled by the dead? Beauty is alive and everlasting.
Languages come and go. They are the dust of the dead.”

And his next thought was that he had been phrasing his ideas very well,
and he went to bed wondering why he could not talk in similar fashion
when he was with Ruth. He was only a schoolboy, with a schoolboy’s
tongue, when he was in her presence.

“Give me time,” he said aloud. “Only give me time.”

Time! Time! Time! was his unending plaint.




CHAPTER XIV.


It was not because of Olney, but in spite of Ruth, and his love for
Ruth, that he finally decided not to take up Latin. His money meant
time. There was so much that was more important than Latin, so many
studies that clamored with imperious voices. And he must write. He must
earn money. He had had no acceptances. Twoscore of manuscripts were
travelling the endless round of the magazines. How did the others do
it? He spent long hours in the free reading-room, going over what
others had written, studying their work eagerly and critically,
comparing it with his own, and wondering, wondering, about the secret
trick they had discovered which enabled them to sell their work.

He was amazed at the immense amount of printed stuff that was dead. No
light, no life, no color, was shot through it. There was no breath of
life in it, and yet it sold, at two cents a word, twenty dollars a
thousand—the newspaper clipping had said so. He was puzzled by
countless short stories, written lightly and cleverly he confessed, but
without vitality or reality. Life was so strange and wonderful, filled
with an immensity of problems, of dreams, and of heroic toils, and yet
these stories dealt only with the commonplaces of life. He felt the
stress and strain of life, its fevers and sweats and wild
insurgences—surely this was the stuff to write about! He wanted to
glorify the leaders of forlorn hopes, the mad lovers, the giants that
fought under stress and strain, amid terror and tragedy, making life
crackle with the strength of their endeavor. And yet the magazine short
stories seemed intent on glorifying the Mr. Butlers, the sordid
dollar-chasers, and the commonplace little love affairs of commonplace
little men and women. Was it because the editors of the magazines were
commonplace? he demanded. Or were they afraid of life, these writers
and editors and readers?

But his chief trouble was that he did not know any editors or writers.
And not merely did he not know any writers, but he did not know anybody
who had ever attempted to write. There was nobody to tell him, to hint
to him, to give him the least word of advice. He began to doubt that
editors were real men. They seemed cogs in a machine. That was what it
was, a machine. He poured his soul into stories, articles, and poems,
and intrusted them to the machine. He folded them just so, put the
proper stamps inside the long envelope along with the manuscript,
sealed the envelope, put more stamps outside, and dropped it into the
mail-box. It travelled across the continent, and after a certain lapse
of time the postman returned him the manuscript in another long
envelope, on the outside of which were the stamps he had enclosed.
There was no human editor at the other end, but a mere cunning
arrangement of cogs that changed the manuscript from one envelope to
another and stuck on the stamps. It was like the slot machines wherein
one dropped pennies, and, with a metallic whirl of machinery had
delivered to him a stick of chewing-gum or a tablet of chocolate. It
depended upon which slot one dropped the penny in, whether he got
chocolate or gum. And so with the editorial machine. One slot brought
checks and the other brought rejection slips. So far he had found only
the latter slot.

It was the rejection slips that completed the horrible machinelikeness
of the process. These slips were printed in stereotyped forms and he
had received hundreds of them—as many as a dozen or more on each of his
earlier manuscripts. If he had received one line, one personal line,
along with one rejection of all his rejections, he would have been
cheered. But not one editor had given that proof of existence. And he
could conclude only that there were no warm human men at the other end,
only mere cogs, well oiled and running beautifully in the machine.

He was a good fighter, whole-souled and stubborn, and he would have
been content to continue feeding the machine for years; but he was
bleeding to death, and not years but weeks would determine the fight.
Each week his board bill brought him nearer destruction, while the
postage on forty manuscripts bled him almost as severely. He no longer
bought books, and he economized in petty ways and sought to delay the
inevitable end; though he did not know how to economize, and brought
the end nearer by a week when he gave his sister Marian five dollars
for a dress.

He struggled in the dark, without advice, without encouragement, and in
the teeth of discouragement. Even Gertrude was beginning to look
askance. At first she had tolerated with sisterly fondness what she
conceived to be his foolishness; but now, out of sisterly solicitude,
she grew anxious. To her it seemed that his foolishness was becoming a
madness. Martin knew this and suffered more keenly from it than from
the open and nagging contempt of Bernard Higginbotham. Martin had faith
in himself, but he was alone in this faith. Not even Ruth had faith.
She had wanted him to devote himself to study, and, though she had not
openly disapproved of his writing, she had never approved.

He had never offered to show her his work. A fastidious delicacy had
prevented him. Besides, she had been studying heavily at the
university, and he felt averse to robbing her of her time. But when she
had taken her degree, she asked him herself to let her see something of
what he had been doing. Martin was elated and diffident. Here was a
judge. She was a bachelor of arts. She had studied literature under
skilled instructors. Perhaps the editors were capable judges, too. But
she would be different from them. She would not hand him a stereotyped
rejection slip, nor would she inform him that lack of preference for
his work did not necessarily imply lack of merit in his work. She would
talk, a warm human being, in her quick, bright way, and, most important
of all, she would catch glimpses of the real Martin Eden. In his work
she would discern what his heart and soul were like, and she would come
to understand something, a little something, of the stuff of his dreams
and the strength of his power.

Martin gathered together a number of carbon copies of his short
stories, hesitated a moment, then added his “Sea Lyrics.” They mounted
their wheels on a late June afternoon and rode for the hills. It was
the second time he had been out with her alone, and as they rode along
through the balmy warmth, just chilled by she sea-breeze to refreshing
coolness, he was profoundly impressed by the fact that it was a very
beautiful and well-ordered world and that it was good to be alive and
to love. They left their wheels by the roadside and climbed to the
brown top of an open knoll where the sunburnt grass breathed a harvest
breath of dry sweetness and content.

“Its work is done,” Martin said, as they seated themselves, she upon
his coat, and he sprawling close to the warm earth. He sniffed the
sweetness of the tawny grass, which entered his brain and set his
thoughts whirling on from the particular to the universal. “It has
achieved its reason for existence,” he went on, patting the dry grass
affectionately. “It quickened with ambition under the dreary downpour
of last winter, fought the violent early spring, flowered, and lured
the insects and the bees, scattered its seeds, squared itself with its
duty and the world, and—”

“Why do you always look at things with such dreadfully practical eyes?”
she interrupted.

“Because I’ve been studying evolution, I guess. It’s only recently that
I got my eyesight, if the truth were told.”

“But it seems to me you lose sight of beauty by being so practical,
that you destroy beauty like the boys who catch butterflies and rub the
down off their beautiful wings.”

He shook his head.

“Beauty has significance, but I never knew its significance before. I
just accepted beauty as something meaningless, as something that was
just beautiful without rhyme or reason. I did not know anything about
beauty. But now I know, or, rather, am just beginning to know. This
grass is more beautiful to me now that I know why it is grass, and all
the hidden chemistry of sun and rain and earth that makes it become
grass. Why, there is romance in the life-history of any grass, yes, and
adventure, too. The very thought of it stirs me. When I think of the
play of force and matter, and all the tremendous struggle of it, I feel
as if I could write an epic on the grass.

“How well you talk,” she said absently, and he noted that she was
looking at him in a searching way.

He was all confusion and embarrassment on the instant, the blood
flushing red on his neck and brow.

“I hope I am learning to talk,” he stammered. “There seems to be so
much in me I want to say. But it is all so big. I can’t find ways to
say what is really in me. Sometimes it seems to me that all the world,
all life, everything, had taken up residence inside of me and was
clamoring for me to be the spokesman. I feel—oh, I can’t describe it—I
feel the bigness of it, but when I speak, I babble like a little child.
It is a great task to transmute feeling and sensation into speech,
written or spoken, that will, in turn, in him who reads or listens,
transmute itself back into the selfsame feeling and sensation. It is a
lordly task. See, I bury my face in the grass, and the breath I draw in
through my nostrils sets me quivering with a thousand thoughts and
fancies. It is a breath of the universe I have breathed. I know song
and laughter, and success and pain, and struggle and death; and I see
visions that arise in my brain somehow out of the scent of the grass,
and I would like to tell them to you, to the world. But how can I? My
tongue is tied. I have tried, by the spoken word, just now, to describe
to you the effect on me of the scent of the grass. But I have not
succeeded. I have no more than hinted in awkward speech. My words seem
gibberish to me. And yet I am stifled with desire to tell. Oh!—” he
threw up his hands with a despairing gesture—“it is impossible! It is
not understandable! It is incommunicable!”

“But you do talk well,” she insisted. “Just think how you have improved
in the short time I have known you. Mr. Butler is a noted public
speaker. He is always asked by the State Committee to go out on stump
during campaign. Yet you talked just as well as he the other night at
dinner. Only he was more controlled. You get too excited; but you will
get over that with practice. Why, you would make a good public speaker.
You can go far—if you want to. You are masterly. You can lead men, I am
sure, and there is no reason why you should not succeed at anything you
set your hand to, just as you have succeeded with grammar. You would
make a good lawyer. You should shine in politics. There is nothing to
prevent you from making as great a success as Mr. Butler has made. And
minus the dyspepsia,” she added with a smile.

They talked on; she, in her gently persistent way, returning always to
the need of thorough grounding in education and to the advantages of
Latin as part of the foundation for any career. She drew her ideal of
the successful man, and it was largely in her father’s image, with a
few unmistakable lines and touches of color from the image of Mr.
Butler. He listened eagerly, with receptive ears, lying on his back and
looking up and joying in each movement of her lips as she talked. But
his brain was not receptive. There was nothing alluring in the pictures
she drew, and he was aware of a dull pain of disappointment and of a
sharper ache of love for her. In all she said there was no mention of
his writing, and the manuscripts he had brought to read lay neglected
on the ground.

At last, in a pause, he glanced at the sun, measured its height above
the horizon, and suggested his manuscripts by picking them up.

“I had forgotten,” she said quickly. “And I am so anxious to hear.”

He read to her a story, one that he flattered himself was among his
very best. He called it “The Wine of Life,” and the wine of it, that
had stolen into his brain when he wrote it, stole into his brain now as
he read it. There was a certain magic in the original conception, and
he had adorned it with more magic of phrase and touch. All the old fire
and passion with which he had written it were reborn in him, and he was
swayed and swept away so that he was blind and deaf to the faults of
it. But it was not so with Ruth. Her trained ear detected the
weaknesses and exaggerations, the overemphasis of the tyro, and she was
instantly aware each time the sentence-rhythm tripped and faltered. She
scarcely noted the rhythm otherwise, except when it became too pompous,
at which moments she was disagreeably impressed with its
amateurishness. That was her final judgment on the story as a
whole—amateurish, though she did not tell him so. Instead, when he had
done, she pointed out the minor flaws and said that she liked the
story.

But he was disappointed. Her criticism was just. He acknowledged that,
but he had a feeling that he was not sharing his work with her for the
purpose of schoolroom correction. The details did not matter. They
could take care of themselves. He could mend them, he could learn to
mend them. Out of life he had captured something big and attempted to
imprison it in the story. It was the big thing out of life he had read
to her, not sentence-structure and semicolons. He wanted her to feel
with him this big thing that was his, that he had seen with his own
eyes, grappled with his own brain, and placed there on the page with
his own hands in printed words. Well, he had failed, was his secret
decision. Perhaps the editors were right. He had felt the big thing,
but he had failed to transmute it. He concealed his disappointment, and
joined so easily with her in her criticism that she did not realize
that deep down in him was running a strong undercurrent of
disagreement.

“This next thing I’ve called ‘The Pot’,” he said, unfolding the
manuscript. “It has been refused by four or five magazines now, but
still I think it is good. In fact, I don’t know what to think of it,
except that I’ve caught something there. Maybe it won’t affect you as
it does me. It’s a short thing—only two thousand words.”

“How dreadful!” she cried, when he had finished. “It is horrible,
unutterably horrible!”

He noted her pale face, her eyes wide and tense, and her clenched
hands, with secret satisfaction. He had succeeded. He had communicated
the stuff of fancy and feeling from out of his brain. It had struck
home. No matter whether she liked it or not, it had gripped her and
mastered her, made her sit there and listen and forget details.

“It is life,” he said, “and life is not always beautiful. And yet,
perhaps because I am strangely made, I find something beautiful there.
It seems to me that the beauty is tenfold enhanced because it is
there—”

“But why couldn’t the poor woman—” she broke in disconnectedly. Then
she left the revolt of her thought unexpressed to cry out: “Oh! It is
degrading! It is not nice! It is nasty!”

For the moment it seemed to him that his heart stood still. _Nasty_! He
had never dreamed it. He had not meant it. The whole sketch stood
before him in letters of fire, and in such blaze of illumination he
sought vainly for nastiness. Then his heart began to beat again. He was
not guilty.

“Why didn’t you select a nice subject?” she was saying. “We know there
are nasty things in the world, but that is no reason—”

She talked on in her indignant strain, but he was not following her. He
was smiling to himself as he looked up into her virginal face, so
innocent, so penetratingly innocent, that its purity seemed always to
enter into him, driving out of him all dross and bathing him in some
ethereal effulgence that was as cool and soft and velvety as starshine.
_We know there are nasty things in the world_! He cuddled to him the
notion of her knowing, and chuckled over it as a love joke. The next
moment, in a flashing vision of multitudinous detail, he sighted the
whole sea of life’s nastiness that he had known and voyaged over and
through, and he forgave her for not understanding the story. It was
through no fault of hers that she could not understand. He thanked God
that she had been born and sheltered to such innocence. But he knew
life, its foulness as well as its fairness, its greatness in spite of
the slime that infested it, and by God he was going to have his say on
it to the world. Saints in heaven—how could they be anything but fair
and pure? No praise to them. But saints in slime—ah, that was the
everlasting wonder! That was what made life worth while. To see moral
grandeur rising out of cesspools of iniquity; to rise himself and first
glimpse beauty, faint and far, through mud-dripping eyes; to see out of
weakness, and frailty, and viciousness, and all abysmal brutishness,
arising strength, and truth, and high spiritual endowment—

He caught a stray sequence of sentences she was uttering.

“The tone of it all is low. And there is so much that is high. Take ‘In
Memoriam.’”

He was impelled to suggest “Locksley Hall,” and would have done so, had
not his vision gripped him again and left him staring at her, the
female of his kind, who, out of the primordial ferment, creeping and
crawling up the vast ladder of life for a thousand thousand centuries,
had emerged on the topmost rung, having become one Ruth, pure, and
fair, and divine, and with power to make him know love, and to aspire
toward purity, and to desire to taste divinity—him, Martin Eden, who,
too, had come up in some amazing fashion from out of the ruck and the
mire and the countless mistakes and abortions of unending creation.
There was the romance, and the wonder, and the glory. There was the
stuff to write, if he could only find speech. Saints in heaven!—They
were only saints and could not help themselves. But he was a man.

“You have strength,” he could hear her saying, “but it is untutored
strength.”

“Like a bull in a china shop,” he suggested, and won a smile.

“And you must develop discrimination. You must consult taste, and
fineness, and tone.”

“I dare too much,” he muttered.

She smiled approbation, and settled herself to listen to another story.

“I don’t know what you’ll make of this,” he said apologetically. “It’s
a funny thing. I’m afraid I got beyond my depth in it, but my
intentions were good. Don’t bother about the little features of it.
Just see if you catch the feel of the big thing in it. It is big, and
it is true, though the chance is large that I have failed to make it
intelligible.”

He read, and as he read he watched her. At last he had reached her, he
thought. She sat without movement, her eyes steadfast upon him,
scarcely breathing, caught up and out of herself, he thought, by the
witchery of the thing he had created. He had entitled the story
“Adventure,” and it was the apotheosis of adventure—not of the
adventure of the storybooks, but of real adventure, the savage
taskmaster, awful of punishment and awful of reward, faithless and
whimsical, demanding terrible patience and heartbreaking days and
nights of toil, offering the blazing sunlight glory or dark death at
the end of thirst and famine or of the long drag and monstrous delirium
of rotting fever, through blood and sweat and stinging insects leading
up by long chains of petty and ignoble contacts to royal culminations
and lordly achievements.

It was this, all of it, and more, that he had put into his story, and
it was this, he believed, that warmed her as she sat and listened. Her
eyes were wide, color was in her pale cheeks, and before he finished it
seemed to him that she was almost panting. Truly, she was warmed; but
she was warmed, not by the story, but by him. She did not think much of
the story; it was Martin’s intensity of power, the old excess of
strength that seemed to pour from his body and on and over her. The
paradox of it was that it was the story itself that was freighted with
his power, that was the channel, for the time being, through which his
strength poured out to her. She was aware only of the strength, and not
of the medium, and when she seemed most carried away by what he had
written, in reality she had been carried away by something quite
foreign to it—by a thought, terrible and perilous, that had formed
itself unsummoned in her brain. She had caught herself wondering what
marriage was like, and the becoming conscious of the waywardness and
ardor of the thought had terrified her. It was unmaidenly. It was not
like her. She had never been tormented by womanhood, and she had lived
in a dreamland of Tennysonian poesy, dense even to the full
significance of that delicate master’s delicate allusions to the
grossnesses that intrude upon the relations of queens and knights. She
had been asleep, always, and now life was thundering imperatively at
all her doors. Mentally she was in a panic to shoot the bolts and drop
the bars into place, while wanton instincts urged her to throw wide her
portals and bid the deliciously strange visitor to enter in.

Martin waited with satisfaction for her verdict. He had no doubt of
what it would be, and he was astounded when he heard her say:

“It is beautiful.”

“It is beautiful,” she repeated, with emphasis, after a pause.

Of course it was beautiful; but there was something more than mere
beauty in it, something more stingingly splendid which had made beauty
its handmaiden. He sprawled silently on the ground, watching the grisly
form of a great doubt rising before him. He had failed. He was
inarticulate. He had seen one of the greatest things in the world, and
he had not expressed it.

“What did you think of the—” He hesitated, abashed at his first attempt
to use a strange word. “Of the _motif_?” he asked.

“It was confused,” she answered. “That is my only criticism in the
large way. I followed the story, but there seemed so much else. It is
too wordy. You clog the action by introducing so much extraneous
material.”

“That was the major _motif_,” he hurriedly explained, “the big
underrunning _motif_, the cosmic and universal thing. I tried to make
it keep time with the story itself, which was only superficial after
all. I was on the right scent, but I guess I did it badly. I did not
succeed in suggesting what I was driving at. But I’ll learn in time.”

She did not follow him. She was a bachelor of arts, but he had gone
beyond her limitations. This she did not comprehend, attributing her
incomprehension to his incoherence.

“You were too voluble,” she said. “But it was beautiful, in places.”

He heard her voice as from far off, for he was debating whether he
would read her the “Sea Lyrics.” He lay in dull despair, while she
watched him searchingly, pondering again upon unsummoned and wayward
thoughts of marriage.

“You want to be famous?” she asked abruptly.

“Yes, a little bit,” he confessed. “That is part of the adventure. It
is not the being famous, but the process of becoming so, that counts.
And after all, to be famous would be, for me, only a means to something
else. I want to be famous very much, for that matter, and for that
reason.”

“For your sake,” he wanted to add, and might have added had she proved
enthusiastic over what he had read to her.

But she was too busy in her mind, carving out a career for him that
would at least be possible, to ask what the ultimate something was
which he had hinted at. There was no career for him in literature. Of
that she was convinced. He had proved it to-day, with his amateurish
and sophomoric productions. He could talk well, but he was incapable of
expressing himself in a literary way. She compared Tennyson, and
Browning, and her favorite prose masters with him, and to his hopeless
discredit. Yet she did not tell him her whole mind. Her strange
interest in him led her to temporize. His desire to write was, after
all, a little weakness which he would grow out of in time. Then he
would devote himself to the more serious affairs of life. And he would
succeed, too. She knew that. He was so strong that he could not fail—if
only he would drop writing.

“I wish you would show me all you write, Mr. Eden,” she said.

He flushed with pleasure. She was interested, that much was sure. And
at least she had not given him a rejection slip. She had called certain
portions of his work beautiful, and that was the first encouragement he
had ever received from any one.

“I will,” he said passionately. “And I promise you, Miss Morse, that I
will make good. I have come far, I know that; and I have far to go, and
I will cover it if I have to do it on my hands and knees.” He held up a
bunch of manuscript. “Here are the ‘Sea Lyrics.’ When you get home,
I’ll turn them over to you to read at your leisure. And you must be
sure to tell me just what you think of them. What I need, you know,
above all things, is criticism. And do, please, be frank with me.”

“I will be perfectly frank,” she promised, with an uneasy conviction
that she had not been frank with him and with a doubt if she could be
quite frank with him the next time.




CHAPTER XV.


“The first battle, fought and finished,” Martin said to the
looking-glass ten days later. “But there will be a second battle, and a
third battle, and battles to the end of time, unless—”

He had not finished the sentence, but looked about the mean little room
and let his eyes dwell sadly upon a heap of returned manuscripts, still
in their long envelopes, which lay in a corner on the floor. He had no
stamps with which to continue them on their travels, and for a week
they had been piling up. More of them would come in on the morrow, and
on the next day, and the next, till they were all in. And he would be
unable to start them out again. He was a month’s rent behind on the
typewriter, which he could not pay, having barely enough for the week’s
board which was due and for the employment office fees.

He sat down and regarded the table thoughtfully. There were ink stains
upon it, and he suddenly discovered that he was fond of it.

“Dear old table,” he said, “I’ve spent some happy hours with you, and
you’ve been a pretty good friend when all is said and done. You never
turned me down, never passed me out a reward-of-unmerit rejection slip,
never complained about working overtime.”

He dropped his arms upon the table and buried his face in them. His
throat was aching, and he wanted to cry. It reminded him of his first
fight, when he was six years old, when he punched away with the tears
running down his cheeks while the other boy, two years his elder, had
beaten and pounded him into exhaustion. He saw the ring of boys,
howling like barbarians as he went down at last, writhing in the throes
of nausea, the blood streaming from his nose and the tears from his
bruised eyes.

“Poor little shaver,” he murmured. “And you’re just as badly licked
now. You’re beaten to a pulp. You’re down and out.”

But the vision of that first fight still lingered under his eyelids,
and as he watched he saw it dissolve and reshape into the series of
fights which had followed. Six months later Cheese-Face (that was the
boy) had whipped him again. But he had blacked Cheese-Face’s eye that
time. That was going some. He saw them all, fight after fight, himself
always whipped and Cheese-Face exulting over him. But he had never run
away. He felt strengthened by the memory of that. He had always stayed
and taken his medicine. Cheese-Face had been a little fiend at
fighting, and had never once shown mercy to him. But he had stayed! He
had stayed with it!

Next, he saw a narrow alley, between ramshackle frame buildings. The
end of the alley was blocked by a one-story brick building, out of
which issued the rhythmic thunder of the presses, running off the first
edition of the _Enquirer_. He was eleven, and Cheese-Face was thirteen,
and they both carried the _Enquirer_. That was why they were there,
waiting for their papers. And, of course, Cheese-Face had picked on him
again, and there was another fight that was indeterminate, because at
quarter to four the door of the press-room was thrown open and the gang
of boys crowded in to fold their papers.

“I’ll lick you to-morrow,” he heard Cheese-Face promise; and he heard
his own voice, piping and trembling with unshed tears, agreeing to be
there on the morrow.

And he had come there the next day, hurrying from school to be there
first, and beating Cheese-Face by two minutes. The other boys said he
was all right, and gave him advice, pointing out his faults as a
scrapper and promising him victory if he carried out their
instructions. The same boys gave Cheese-Face advice, too. How they had
enjoyed the fight! He paused in his recollections long enough to envy
them the spectacle he and Cheese-Face had put up. Then the fight was
on, and it went on, without rounds, for thirty minutes, until the
press-room door was opened.

He watched the youthful apparition of himself, day after day, hurrying
from school to the _Enquirer_ alley. He could not walk very fast. He
was stiff and lame from the incessant fighting. His forearms were black
and blue from wrist to elbow, what of the countless blows he had warded
off, and here and there the tortured flesh was beginning to fester. His
head and arms and shoulders ached, the small of his back ached,—he
ached all over, and his brain was heavy and dazed. He did not play at
school. Nor did he study. Even to sit still all day at his desk, as he
did, was a torment. It seemed centuries since he had begun the round of
daily fights, and time stretched away into a nightmare and infinite
future of daily fights. Why couldn’t Cheese-Face be licked? he often
thought; that would put him, Martin, out of his misery. It never
entered his head to cease fighting, to allow Cheese-Face to whip him.

And so he dragged himself to the _Enquirer_ alley, sick in body and
soul, but learning the long patience, to confront his eternal enemy,
Cheese-Face, who was just as sick as he, and just a bit willing to quit
if it were not for the gang of newsboys that looked on and made pride
painful and necessary. One afternoon, after twenty minutes of desperate
efforts to annihilate each other according to set rules that did not
permit kicking, striking below the belt, nor hitting when one was down,
Cheese-Face, panting for breath and reeling, offered to call it quits.
And Martin, head on arms, thrilled at the picture he caught of himself,
at that moment in the afternoon of long ago, when he reeled and panted
and choked with the blood that ran into his mouth and down his throat
from his cut lips; when he tottered toward Cheese-Face, spitting out a
mouthful of blood so that he could speak, crying out that he would
never quit, though Cheese-Face could give in if he wanted to. And
Cheese-Face did not give in, and the fight went on.

The next day and the next, days without end, witnessed the afternoon
fight. When he put up his arms, each day, to begin, they pained
exquisitely, and the first few blows, struck and received, racked his
soul; after that things grew numb, and he fought on blindly, seeing as
in a dream, dancing and wavering, the large features and burning,
animal-like eyes of Cheese-Face. He concentrated upon that face; all
else about him was a whirling void. There was nothing else in the world
but that face, and he would never know rest, blessed rest, until he had
beaten that face into a pulp with his bleeding knuckles, or until the
bleeding knuckles that somehow belonged to that face had beaten him
into a pulp. And then, one way or the other, he would have rest. But to
quit,—for him, Martin, to quit,—that was impossible!

Came the day when he dragged himself into the _Enquirer_ alley, and
there was no Cheese-Face. Nor did Cheese-Face come. The boys
congratulated him, and told him that he had licked Cheese-Face. But
Martin was not satisfied. He had not licked Cheese-Face, nor had
Cheese-Face licked him. The problem had not been solved. It was not
until afterward that they learned that Cheese-Face’s father had died
suddenly that very day.

Martin skipped on through the years to the night in the nigger heaven
at the Auditorium. He was seventeen and just back from sea. A row
started. Somebody was bullying somebody, and Martin interfered, to be
confronted by Cheese-Face’s blazing eyes.

“I’ll fix you after de show,” his ancient enemy hissed.

Martin nodded. The nigger-heaven bouncer was making his way toward the
disturbance.

“I’ll meet you outside, after the last act,” Martin whispered, the
while his face showed undivided interest in the buck-and-wing dancing
on the stage.

The bouncer glared and went away.

“Got a gang?” he asked Cheese-Face, at the end of the act.

“Sure.”

“Then I got to get one,” Martin announced.

Between the acts he mustered his following—three fellows he knew from
the nail works, a railroad fireman, and half a dozen of the Boo Gang,
along with as many more from the dread Eighteen-and-Market Gang.

When the theatre let out, the two gangs strung along inconspicuously on
opposite sides of the street. When they came to a quiet corner, they
united and held a council of war.

“Eighth Street Bridge is the place,” said a red-headed fellow belonging
to Cheese-Face’s Gang. “You kin fight in the middle, under the electric
light, an’ whichever way the bulls come in we kin sneak the other way.”

“That’s agreeable to me,” Martin said, after consulting with the
leaders of his own gang.

The Eighth Street Bridge, crossing an arm of San Antonio Estuary, was
the length of three city blocks. In the middle of the bridge, and at
each end, were electric lights. No policeman could pass those
end-lights unseen. It was the safe place for the battle that revived
itself under Martin’s eyelids. He saw the two gangs, aggressive and
sullen, rigidly keeping apart from each other and backing their
respective champions; and he saw himself and Cheese-Face stripping. A
short distance away lookouts were set, their task being to watch the
lighted ends of the bridge. A member of the Boo Gang held Martin’s
coat, and shirt, and cap, ready to race with them into safety in case
the police interfered. Martin watched himself go into the centre,
facing Cheese-Face, and he heard himself say, as he held up his hand
warningly:-

“They ain’t no hand-shakin’ in this. Understand? They ain’t nothin’ but
scrap. No throwin’ up the sponge. This is a grudge-fight an’ it’s to a
finish. Understand? Somebody’s goin’ to get licked.”

Cheese-Face wanted to demur,—Martin could see that,—but Cheese-Face’s
old perilous pride was touched before the two gangs.

“Aw, come on,” he replied. “Wot’s the good of chewin’ de rag about it?
I’m wit’ cheh to de finish.”

Then they fell upon each other, like young bulls, in all the glory of
youth, with naked fists, with hatred, with desire to hurt, to maim, to
destroy. All the painful, thousand years’ gains of man in his upward
climb through creation were lost. Only the electric light remained, a
milestone on the path of the great human adventure. Martin and
Cheese-Face were two savages, of the stone age, of the squatting place
and the tree refuge. They sank lower and lower into the muddy abyss,
back into the dregs of the raw beginnings of life, striving blindly and
chemically, as atoms strive, as the star-dust of the heavens strives,
colliding, recoiling, and colliding again and eternally again.

“God! We are animals! Brute-beasts!” Martin muttered aloud, as he
watched the progress of the fight. It was to him, with his splendid
power of vision, like gazing into a kinetoscope. He was both onlooker
and participant. His long months of culture and refinement shuddered at
the sight; then the present was blotted out of his consciousness and
the ghosts of the past possessed him, and he was Martin Eden, just
returned from sea and fighting Cheese-Face on the Eighth Street Bridge.
He suffered and toiled and sweated and bled, and exulted when his naked
knuckles smashed home.

They were twin whirlwinds of hatred, revolving about each other
monstrously. The time passed, and the two hostile gangs became very
quiet. They had never witnessed such intensity of ferocity, and they
were awed by it. The two fighters were greater brutes than they. The
first splendid velvet edge of youth and condition wore off, and they
fought more cautiously and deliberately. There had been no advantage
gained either way. “It’s anybody’s fight,” Martin heard some one
saying. Then he followed up a feint, right and left, was fiercely
countered, and felt his cheek laid open to the bone. No bare knuckle
had done that. He heard mutters of amazement at the ghastly damage
wrought, and was drenched with his own blood. But he gave no sign. He
became immensely wary, for he was wise with knowledge of the low
cunning and foul vileness of his kind. He watched and waited, until he
feigned a wild rush, which he stopped midway, for he had seen the glint
of metal.

“Hold up yer hand!” he screamed. “Them’s brass knuckles, an’ you hit me
with ’em!”

Both gangs surged forward, growling and snarling. In a second there
would be a free-for-all fight, and he would be robbed of his vengeance.
He was beside himself.

“You guys keep out!” he screamed hoarsely. “Understand? Say, d’ye
understand?”

They shrank away from him. They were brutes, but he was the arch-brute,
a thing of terror that towered over them and dominated them.

“This is my scrap, an’ they ain’t goin’ to be no buttin’ in. Gimme them
knuckles.”

Cheese-Face, sobered and a bit frightened, surrendered the foul weapon.

“You passed ’em to him, you red-head sneakin’ in behind the push
there,” Martin went on, as he tossed the knuckles into the water. “I
seen you, an’ I was wonderin’ what you was up to. If you try anything
like that again, I’ll beat cheh to death. Understand?”

They fought on, through exhaustion and beyond, to exhaustion
immeasurable and inconceivable, until the crowd of brutes, its
blood-lust sated, terrified by what it saw, begged them impartially to
cease. And Cheese-Face, ready to drop and die, or to stay on his legs
and die, a grisly monster out of whose features all likeness to
Cheese-Face had been beaten, wavered and hesitated; but Martin sprang
in and smashed him again and again.

Next, after a seeming century or so, with Cheese-Face weakening fast,
in a mix-up of blows there was a loud snap, and Martin’s right arm
dropped to his side. It was a broken bone. Everybody heard it and knew;
and Cheese-Face knew, rushing like a tiger in the other’s extremity and
raining blow on blow. Martin’s gang surged forward to interfere. Dazed
by the rapid succession of blows, Martin warned them back with vile and
earnest curses sobbed out and groaned in ultimate desolation and
despair.

He punched on, with his left hand only, and as he punched, doggedly,
only half-conscious, as from a remote distance he heard murmurs of fear
in the gangs, and one who said with shaking voice: “This ain’t a scrap,
fellows. It’s murder, an’ we ought to stop it.”

But no one stopped it, and he was glad, punching on wearily and
endlessly with his one arm, battering away at a bloody something before
him that was not a face but a horror, an oscillating, hideous,
gibbering, nameless thing that persisted before his wavering vision and
would not go away. And he punched on and on, slower and slower, as the
last shreds of vitality oozed from him, through centuries and aeons and
enormous lapses of time, until, in a dim way, he became aware that the
nameless thing was sinking, slowly sinking down to the rough
board-planking of the bridge. And the next moment he was standing over
it, staggering and swaying on shaky legs, clutching at the air for
support, and saying in a voice he did not recognize:-

“D’ye want any more? Say, d’ye want any more?”

He was still saying it, over and over,—demanding, entreating,
threatening, to know if it wanted any more,—when he felt the fellows of
his gang laying hands on him, patting him on the back and trying to put
his coat on him. And then came a sudden rush of blackness and oblivion.

The tin alarm-clock on the table ticked on, but Martin Eden, his face
buried on his arms, did not hear it. He heard nothing. He did not
think. So absolutely had he relived life that he had fainted just as he
fainted years before on the Eighth Street Bridge. For a full minute the
blackness and the blankness endured. Then, like one from the dead, he
sprang upright, eyes flaming, sweat pouring down his face, shouting:-

“I licked you, Cheese-Face! It took me eleven years, but I licked you!”

His knees were trembling under him, he felt faint, and he staggered
back to the bed, sinking down and sitting on the edge of it. He was
still in the clutch of the past. He looked about the room, perplexed,
alarmed, wondering where he was, until he caught sight of the pile of
manuscripts in the corner. Then the wheels of memory slipped ahead
through four years of time, and he was aware of the present, of the
books he had opened and the universe he had won from their pages, of
his dreams and ambitions, and of his love for a pale wraith of a girl,
sensitive and sheltered and ethereal, who would die of horror did she
witness but one moment of what he had just lived through—one moment of
all the muck of life through which he had waded.

He arose to his feet and confronted himself in the looking-glass.

“And so you arise from the mud, Martin Eden,” he said solemnly. “And
you cleanse your eyes in a great brightness, and thrust your shoulders
among the stars, doing what all life has done, letting the ‘ape and
tiger die’ and wresting highest heritage from all powers that be.”

He looked more closely at himself and laughed.

“A bit of hysteria and melodrama, eh?” he queried. “Well, never mind.
You licked Cheese-Face, and you’ll lick the editors if it takes twice
eleven years to do it in. You can’t stop here. You’ve got to go on.
It’s to a finish, you know.”




CHAPTER XVI.


The alarm-clock went off, jerking Martin out of sleep with a suddenness
that would have given headache to one with less splendid constitution.
Though he slept soundly, he awoke instantly, like a cat, and he awoke
eagerly, glad that the five hours of unconsciousness were gone. He
hated the oblivion of sleep. There was too much to do, too much of life
to live. He grudged every moment of life sleep robbed him of, and
before the clock had ceased its clattering he was head and ears in the
washbasin and thrilling to the cold bite of the water.

But he did not follow his regular programme. There was no unfinished
story waiting his hand, no new story demanding articulation. He had
studied late, and it was nearly time for breakfast. He tried to read a
chapter in Fiske, but his brain was restless and he closed the book.
To-day witnessed the beginning of the new battle, wherein for some time
there would be no writing. He was aware of a sadness akin to that with
which one leaves home and family. He looked at the manuscripts in the
corner. That was it. He was going away from them, his pitiful,
dishonored children that were welcome nowhere. He went over and began
to rummage among them, reading snatches here and there, his favorite
portions. “The Pot” he honored with reading aloud, as he did
“Adventure.” “Joy,” his latest-born, completed the day before and
tossed into the corner for lack of stamps, won his keenest approbation.

“I can’t understand,” he murmured. “Or maybe it’s the editors who can’t
understand. There’s nothing wrong with that. They publish worse every
month. Everything they publish is worse—nearly everything, anyway.”

After breakfast he put the type-writer in its case and carried it down
into Oakland.

“I owe a month on it,” he told the clerk in the store. “But you tell
the manager I’m going to work and that I’ll be in in a month or so and
straighten up.”

He crossed on the ferry to San Francisco and made his way to an
employment office. “Any kind of work, no trade,” he told the agent; and
was interrupted by a new-comer, dressed rather foppishly, as some
workingmen dress who have instincts for finer things. The agent shook
his head despondently.

“Nothin’ doin’ eh?” said the other. “Well, I got to get somebody
to-day.”

He turned and stared at Martin, and Martin, staring back, noted the
puffed and discolored face, handsome and weak, and knew that he had
been making a night of it.

“Lookin’ for a job?” the other queried. “What can you do?”

“Hard labor, sailorizing, run a type-writer, no shorthand, can sit on a
horse, willing to do anything and tackle anything,” was the answer.

The other nodded.

“Sounds good to me. My name’s Dawson, Joe Dawson, an’ I’m tryin’ to
scare up a laundryman.”

“Too much for me.” Martin caught an amusing glimpse of himself ironing
fluffy white things that women wear. But he had taken a liking to the
other, and he added: “I might do the plain washing. I learned that much
at sea.” Joe Dawson thought visibly for a moment.

“Look here, let’s get together an’ frame it up. Willin’ to listen?”

Martin nodded.

“This is a small laundry, up country, belongs to Shelly Hot
Springs,—hotel, you know. Two men do the work, boss and assistant. I’m
the boss. You don’t work for me, but you work under me. Think you’d be
willin’ to learn?”

Martin paused to think. The prospect was alluring. A few months of it,
and he would have time to himself for study. He could work hard and
study hard.

“Good grub an’ a room to yourself,” Joe said.

That settled it. A room to himself where he could burn the midnight oil
unmolested.

“But work like hell,” the other added.

Martin caressed his swelling shoulder-muscles significantly. “That came
from hard work.”

“Then let’s get to it.” Joe held his hand to his head for a moment.
“Gee, but it’s a stem-winder. Can hardly see. I went down the line last
night—everything—everything. Here’s the frame-up. The wages for two is
a hundred and board. I’ve ben drawin’ down sixty, the second man forty.
But he knew the biz. You’re green. If I break you in, I’ll be doing
plenty of your work at first. Suppose you begin at thirty, an’ work up
to the forty. I’ll play fair. Just as soon as you can do your share you
get the forty.”

“I’ll go you,” Martin announced, stretching out his hand, which the
other shook. “Any advance?—for rail-road ticket and extras?”

“I blew it in,” was Joe’s sad answer, with another reach at his aching
head. “All I got is a return ticket.”

“And I’m broke—when I pay my board.”

“Jump it,” Joe advised.

“Can’t. Owe it to my sister.”

Joe whistled a long, perplexed whistle, and racked his brains to little
purpose.

“I’ve got the price of the drinks,” he said desperately. “Come on, an’
mebbe we’ll cook up something.”

Martin declined.

“Water-wagon?”

This time Martin nodded, and Joe lamented, “Wish I was.”

“But I somehow just can’t,” he said in extenuation. “After I’ve ben
workin’ like hell all week I just got to booze up. If I didn’t, I’d cut
my throat or burn up the premises. But I’m glad you’re on the wagon.
Stay with it.”

Martin knew of the enormous gulf between him and this man—the gulf the
books had made; but he found no difficulty in crossing back over that
gulf. He had lived all his life in the working-class world, and the
_camaraderie_ of labor was second nature with him. He solved the
difficulty of transportation that was too much for the other’s aching
head. He would send his trunk up to Shelly Hot Springs on Joe’s ticket.
As for himself, there was his wheel. It was seventy miles, and he could
ride it on Sunday and be ready for work Monday morning. In the meantime
he would go home and pack up. There was no one to say good-by to. Ruth
and her whole family were spending the long summer in the Sierras, at
Lake Tahoe.

He arrived at Shelly Hot Springs, tired and dusty, on Sunday night. Joe
greeted him exuberantly. With a wet towel bound about his aching brow,
he had been at work all day.

“Part of last week’s washin’ mounted up, me bein’ away to get you,” he
explained. “Your box arrived all right. It’s in your room. But it’s a
hell of a thing to call a trunk. An’ what’s in it? Gold bricks?”

Joe sat on the bed while Martin unpacked. The box was a packing-case
for breakfast food, and Mr. Higginbotham had charged him half a dollar
for it. Two rope handles, nailed on by Martin, had technically
transformed it into a trunk eligible for the baggage-car. Joe watched,
with bulging eyes, a few shirts and several changes of underclothes
come out of the box, followed by books, and more books.

“Books clean to the bottom?” he asked.

Martin nodded, and went on arranging the books on a kitchen table which
served in the room in place of a wash-stand.

“Gee!” Joe exploded, then waited in silence for the deduction to arise
in his brain. At last it came.

“Say, you don’t care for the girls—much?” he queried.

“No,” was the answer. “I used to chase a lot before I tackled the
books. But since then there’s no time.”

“And there won’t be any time here. All you can do is work an’ sleep.”

Martin thought of his five hours’ sleep a night, and smiled. The room
was situated over the laundry and was in the same building with the
engine that pumped water, made electricity, and ran the laundry
machinery. The engineer, who occupied the adjoining room, dropped in to
meet the new hand and helped Martin rig up an electric bulb, on an
extension wire, so that it travelled along a stretched cord from over
the table to the bed.

The next morning, at quarter-past six, Martin was routed out for a
quarter-to-seven breakfast. There happened to be a bath-tub for the
servants in the laundry building, and he electrified Joe by taking a
cold bath.

“Gee, but you’re a hummer!” Joe announced, as they sat down to
breakfast in a corner of the hotel kitchen.

With them was the engineer, the gardener, and the assistant gardener,
and two or three men from the stable. They ate hurriedly and gloomily,
with but little conversation, and as Martin ate and listened he
realized how far he had travelled from their status. Their small mental
caliber was depressing to him, and he was anxious to get away from
them. So he bolted his breakfast, a sickly, sloppy affair, as rapidly
as they, and heaved a sigh of relief when he passed out through the
kitchen door.

It was a perfectly appointed, small steam laundry, wherein the most
modern machinery did everything that was possible for machinery to do.
Martin, after a few instructions, sorted the great heaps of soiled
clothes, while Joe started the masher and made up fresh supplies of
soft-soap, compounded of biting chemicals that compelled him to swathe
his mouth and nostrils and eyes in bath-towels till he resembled a
mummy. Finished the sorting, Martin lent a hand in wringing the
clothes. This was done by dumping them into a spinning receptacle that
went at a rate of a few thousand revolutions a minute, tearing the
water from the clothes by centrifugal force. Then Martin began to
alternate between the dryer and the wringer, between times “shaking
out” socks and stockings. By the afternoon, one feeding and one
stacking up, they were running socks and stockings through the mangle
while the irons were heating. Then it was hot irons and underclothes
till six o’clock, at which time Joe shook his head dubiously.

“Way behind,” he said. “Got to work after supper.” And after supper
they worked until ten o’clock, under the blazing electric lights, until
the last piece of under-clothing was ironed and folded away in the
distributing room. It was a hot California night, and though the
windows were thrown wide, the room, with its red-hot ironing-stove, was
a furnace. Martin and Joe, down to undershirts, bare armed, sweated and
panted for air.

“Like trimming cargo in the tropics,” Martin said, when they went
upstairs.

“You’ll do,” Joe answered. “You take hold like a good fellow. If you
keep up the pace, you’ll be on thirty dollars only one month. The
second month you’ll be gettin’ your forty. But don’t tell me you never
ironed before. I know better.”

“Never ironed a rag in my life, honestly, until to-day,” Martin
protested.

He was surprised at his weariness when he got into his room, forgetful
of the fact that he had been on his feet and working without let up for
fourteen hours. He set the alarm clock at six, and measured back five
hours to one o’clock. He could read until then. Slipping off his shoes,
to ease his swollen feet, he sat down at the table with his books. He
opened Fiske, where he had left off to read. But he found trouble and
began to read it through a second time. Then he awoke, in pain from his
stiffened muscles and chilled by the mountain wind that had begun to
blow in through the window. He looked at the clock. It marked two. He
had been asleep four hours. He pulled off his clothes and crawled into
bed, where he was asleep the moment after his head touched the pillow.

Tuesday was a day of similar unremitting toil. The speed with which Joe
worked won Martin’s admiration. Joe was a dozen of demons for work. He
was keyed up to concert pitch, and there was never a moment in the long
day when he was not fighting for moments. He concentrated himself upon
his work and upon how to save time, pointing out to Martin where he did
in five motions what could be done in three, or in three motions what
could be done in two. “Elimination of waste motion,” Martin phrased it
as he watched and patterned after. He was a good workman himself, quick
and deft, and it had always been a point of pride with him that no man
should do any of his work for him or outwork him. As a result, he
concentrated with a similar singleness of purpose, greedily snapping up
the hints and suggestions thrown out by his working mate. He “rubbed
out” collars and cuffs, rubbing the starch out from between the double
thicknesses of linen so that there would be no blisters when it came to
the ironing, and doing it at a pace that elicited Joe’s praise.

There was never an interval when something was not at hand to be done.
Joe waited for nothing, waited on nothing, and went on the jump from
task to task. They starched two hundred white shirts, with a single
gathering movement seizing a shirt so that the wristbands, neckband,
yoke, and bosom protruded beyond the circling right hand. At the same
moment the left hand held up the body of the shirt so that it would not
enter the starch, and at the same moment the right hand dipped into the
starch—starch so hot that, in order to wring it out, their hands had to
thrust, and thrust continually, into a bucket of cold water. And that
night they worked till half-past ten, dipping “fancy starch”—all the
frilled and airy, delicate wear of ladies.

“Me for the tropics and no clothes,” Martin laughed.

“And me out of a job,” Joe answered seriously. “I don’t know nothin’
but laundrying.”

“And you know it well.”

“I ought to. Began in the Contra Costa in Oakland when I was eleven,
shakin’ out for the mangle. That was eighteen years ago, an’ I’ve never
done a tap of anything else. But this job is the fiercest I ever had.
Ought to be one more man on it at least. We work to-morrow night.
Always run the mangle Wednesday nights—collars an’ cuffs.”

Martin set his alarm, drew up to the table, and opened Fiske. He did
not finish the first paragraph. The lines blurred and ran together and
his head nodded. He walked up and down, batting his head savagely with
his fists, but he could not conquer the numbness of sleep. He propped
the book before him, and propped his eyelids with his fingers, and fell
asleep with his eyes wide open. Then he surrendered, and, scarcely
conscious of what he did, got off his clothes and into bed. He slept
seven hours of heavy, animal-like sleep, and awoke by the alarm,
feeling that he had not had enough.

“Doin’ much readin’?” Joe asked.

Martin shook his head.

“Never mind. We got to run the mangle to-night, but Thursday we’ll
knock off at six. That’ll give you a chance.”

Martin washed woollens that day, by hand, in a large barrel, with
strong soft-soap, by means of a hub from a wagon wheel, mounted on a
plunger-pole that was attached to a spring-pole overhead.

“My invention,” Joe said proudly. “Beats a washboard an’ your knuckles,
and, besides, it saves at least fifteen minutes in the week, an’
fifteen minutes ain’t to be sneezed at in this shebang.”

Running the collars and cuffs through the mangle was also Joe’s idea.
That night, while they toiled on under the electric lights, he
explained it.

“Something no laundry ever does, except this one. An’ I got to do it if
I’m goin’ to get done Saturday afternoon at three o’clock. But I know
how, an’ that’s the difference. Got to have right heat, right pressure,
and run ’em through three times. Look at that!” He held a cuff aloft.
“Couldn’t do it better by hand or on a tiler.”

Thursday, Joe was in a rage. A bundle of extra “fancy starch” had come
in.

“I’m goin’ to quit,” he announced. “I won’t stand for it. I’m goin’ to
quit it cold. What’s the good of me workin’ like a slave all week,
a-savin’ minutes, an’ them a-comin’ an’ ringin’ in fancy-starch extras
on me? This is a free country, an’ I’m to tell that fat Dutchman what I
think of him. An’ I won’t tell ’m in French. Plain United States is
good enough for me. Him a-ringin’ in fancy starch extras!”

“We got to work to-night,” he said the next moment, reversing his
judgment and surrendering to fate.

And Martin did no reading that night. He had seen no daily paper all
week, and, strangely to him, felt no desire to see one. He was not
interested in the news. He was too tired and jaded to be interested in
anything, though he planned to leave Saturday afternoon, if they
finished at three, and ride on his wheel to Oakland. It was seventy
miles, and the same distance back on Sunday afternoon would leave him
anything but rested for the second week’s work. It would have been
easier to go on the train, but the round trip was two dollars and a
half, and he was intent on saving money.




CHAPTER XVII.


Martin learned to do many things. In the course of the first week, in
one afternoon, he and Joe accounted for the two hundred white shirts.
Joe ran the tiler, a machine wherein a hot iron was hooked on a steel
string which furnished the pressure. By this means he ironed the yoke,
wristbands, and neckband, setting the latter at right angles to the
shirt, and put the glossy finish on the bosom. As fast as he finished
them, he flung the shirts on a rack between him and Martin, who caught
them up and “backed” them. This task consisted of ironing all the
unstarched portions of the shirts.

It was exhausting work, carried on, hour after hour, at top speed. Out
on the broad verandas of the hotel, men and women, in cool white,
sipped iced drinks and kept their circulation down. But in the laundry
the air was sizzling. The huge stove roared red hot and white hot,
while the irons, moving over the damp cloth, sent up clouds of steam.
The heat of these irons was different from that used by housewives. An
iron that stood the ordinary test of a wet finger was too cold for Joe
and Martin, and such test was useless. They went wholly by holding the
irons close to their cheeks, gauging the heat by some secret mental
process that Martin admired but could not understand. When the fresh
irons proved too hot, they hooked them on iron rods and dipped them
into cold water. This again required a precise and subtle judgment. A
fraction of a second too long in the water and the fine and silken edge
of the proper heat was lost, and Martin found time to marvel at the
accuracy he developed—an automatic accuracy, founded upon criteria that
were machine-like and unerring.

But there was little time in which to marvel. All Martin’s
consciousness was concentrated in the work. Ceaselessly active, head
and hand, an intelligent machine, all that constituted him a man was
devoted to furnishing that intelligence. There was no room in his brain
for the universe and its mighty problems. All the broad and spacious
corridors of his mind were closed and hermetically sealed. The echoing
chamber of his soul was a narrow room, a conning tower, whence were
directed his arm and shoulder muscles, his ten nimble fingers, and the
swift-moving iron along its steaming path in broad, sweeping strokes,
just so many strokes and no more, just so far with each stroke and not
a fraction of an inch farther, rushing along interminable sleeves,
sides, backs, and tails, and tossing the finished shirts, without
rumpling, upon the receiving frame. And even as his hurrying soul
tossed, it was reaching for another shirt. This went on, hour after
hour, while outside all the world swooned under the overhead California
sun. But there was no swooning in that superheated room. The cool
guests on the verandas needed clean linen.

The sweat poured from Martin. He drank enormous quantities of water,
but so great was the heat of the day and of his exertions, that the
water sluiced through the interstices of his flesh and out at all his
pores. Always, at sea, except at rare intervals, the work he performed
had given him ample opportunity to commune with himself. The master of
the ship had been lord of Martin’s time; but here the manager of the
hotel was lord of Martin’s thoughts as well. He had no thoughts save
for the nerve-racking, body-destroying toil. Outside of that it was
impossible to think. He did not know that he loved Ruth. She did not
even exist, for his driven soul had no time to remember her. It was
only when he crawled to bed at night, or to breakfast in the morning,
that she asserted herself to him in fleeting memories.

“This is hell, ain’t it?” Joe remarked once.

Martin nodded, but felt a rasp of irritation. The statement had been
obvious and unnecessary. They did not talk while they worked.
Conversation threw them out of their stride, as it did this time,
compelling Martin to miss a stroke of his iron and to make two extra
motions before he caught his stride again.

On Friday morning the washer ran. Twice a week they had to put through
hotel linen,—the sheets, pillow-slips, spreads, table-cloths, and
napkins. This finished, they buckled down to “fancy starch.” It was
slow work, fastidious and delicate, and Martin did not learn it so
readily. Besides, he could not take chances. Mistakes were disastrous.

“See that,” Joe said, holding up a filmy corset-cover that he could
have crumpled from view in one hand. “Scorch that an’ it’s twenty
dollars out of your wages.”

So Martin did not scorch that, and eased down on his muscular tension,
though nervous tension rose higher than ever, and he listened
sympathetically to the other’s blasphemies as he toiled and suffered
over the beautiful things that women wear when they do not have to do
their own laundrying. “Fancy starch” was Martin’s nightmare, and it was
Joe’s, too. It was “fancy starch” that robbed them of their hard-won
minutes. They toiled at it all day. At seven in the evening they broke
off to run the hotel linen through the mangle. At ten o’clock, while
the hotel guests slept, the two laundrymen sweated on at “fancy starch”
till midnight, till one, till two. At half-past two they knocked off.

Saturday morning it was “fancy starch,” and odds and ends, and at three
in the afternoon the week’s work was done.

“You ain’t a-goin’ to ride them seventy miles into Oakland on top of
this?” Joe demanded, as they sat on the stairs and took a triumphant
smoke.

“Got to,” was the answer.

“What are you goin’ for?—a girl?”

“No; to save two and a half on the railroad ticket. I want to renew
some books at the library.”

“Why don’t you send ’em down an’ up by express? That’ll cost only a
quarter each way.”

Martin considered it.

“An’ take a rest to-morrow,” the other urged. “You need it. I know I
do. I’m plumb tuckered out.”

He looked it. Indomitable, never resting, fighting for seconds and
minutes all week, circumventing delays and crushing down obstacles, a
fount of resistless energy, a high-driven human motor, a demon for
work, now that he had accomplished the week’s task he was in a state of
collapse. He was worn and haggard, and his handsome face drooped in
lean exhaustion. He pulled his cigarette spiritlessly, and his voice
was peculiarly dead and monotonous. All the snap and fire had gone out
of him. His triumph seemed a sorry one.

“An’ next week we got to do it all over again,” he said sadly. “An’
what’s the good of it all, hey? Sometimes I wish I was a hobo. They
don’t work, an’ they get their livin’. Gee! I wish I had a glass of
beer; but I can’t get up the gumption to go down to the village an’ get
it. You’ll stay over, an’ send your books down by express, or else
you’re a damn fool.”

“But what can I do here all day Sunday?” Martin asked.

“Rest. You don’t know how tired you are. Why, I’m that tired Sunday I
can’t even read the papers. I was sick once—typhoid. In the hospital
two months an’ a half. Didn’t do a tap of work all that time. It was
beautiful.”

“It was beautiful,” he repeated dreamily, a minute later.

Martin took a bath, after which he found that the head laundryman had
disappeared. Most likely he had gone for a glass of beer Martin
decided, but the half-mile walk down to the village to find out seemed
a long journey to him. He lay on his bed with his shoes off, trying to
make up his mind. He did not reach out for a book. He was too tired to
feel sleepy, and he lay, scarcely thinking, in a semi-stupor of
weariness, until it was time for supper. Joe did not appear for that
function, and when Martin heard the gardener remark that most likely he
was ripping the slats off the bar, Martin understood. He went to bed
immediately afterward, and in the morning decided that he was greatly
rested. Joe being still absent, Martin procured a Sunday paper and lay
down in a shady nook under the trees. The morning passed, he knew not
how. He did not sleep, nobody disturbed him, and he did not finish the
paper. He came back to it in the afternoon, after dinner, and fell
asleep over it.

So passed Sunday, and Monday morning he was hard at work, sorting
clothes, while Joe, a towel bound tightly around his head, with groans
and blasphemies, was running the washer and mixing soft-soap.

“I simply can’t help it,” he explained. “I got to drink when Saturday
night comes around.”

Another week passed, a great battle that continued under the electric
lights each night and that culminated on Saturday afternoon at three
o’clock, when Joe tasted his moment of wilted triumph and then drifted
down to the village to forget. Martin’s Sunday was the same as before.
He slept in the shade of the trees, toiled aimlessly through the
newspaper, and spent long hours lying on his back, doing nothing,
thinking nothing. He was too dazed to think, though he was aware that
he did not like himself. He was self-repelled, as though he had
undergone some degradation or was intrinsically foul. All that was
god-like in him was blotted out. The spur of ambition was blunted; he
had no vitality with which to feel the prod of it. He was dead. His
soul seemed dead. He was a beast, a work-beast. He saw no beauty in the
sunshine sifting down through the green leaves, nor did the azure vault
of the sky whisper as of old and hint of cosmic vastness and secrets
trembling to disclosure. Life was intolerably dull and stupid, and its
taste was bad in his mouth. A black screen was drawn across his mirror
of inner vision, and fancy lay in a darkened sick-room where entered no
ray of light. He envied Joe, down in the village, rampant, tearing the
slats off the bar, his brain gnawing with maggots, exulting in maudlin
ways over maudlin things, fantastically and gloriously drunk and
forgetful of Monday morning and the week of deadening toil to come.

A third week went by, and Martin loathed himself, and loathed life. He
was oppressed by a sense of failure. There was reason for the editors
refusing his stuff. He could see that clearly now, and laugh at himself
and the dreams he had dreamed. Ruth returned his “Sea Lyrics” by mail.
He read her letter apathetically. She did her best to say how much she
liked them and that they were beautiful. But she could not lie, and she
could not disguise the truth from herself. She knew they were failures,
and he read her disapproval in every perfunctory and unenthusiastic
line of her letter. And she was right. He was firmly convinced of it as
he read the poems over. Beauty and wonder had departed from him, and as
he read the poems he caught himself puzzling as to what he had had in
mind when he wrote them. His audacities of phrase struck him as
grotesque, his felicities of expression were monstrosities, and
everything was absurd, unreal, and impossible. He would have burned the
“Sea Lyrics” on the spot, had his will been strong enough to set them
aflame. There was the engine-room, but the exertion of carrying them to
the furnace was not worth while. All his exertion was used in washing
other persons’ clothes. He did not have any left for private affairs.

He resolved that when Sunday came he would pull himself together and
answer Ruth’s letter. But Saturday afternoon, after work was finished
and he had taken a bath, the desire to forget overpowered him. “I guess
I’ll go down and see how Joe’s getting on,” was the way he put it to
himself; and in the same moment he knew that he lied. But he did not
have the energy to consider the lie. If he had had the energy, he would
have refused to consider the lie, because he wanted to forget. He
started for the village slowly and casually, increasing his pace in
spite of himself as he neared the saloon.

“I thought you was on the water-wagon,” was Joe’s greeting.

Martin did not deign to offer excuses, but called for whiskey, filling
his own glass brimming before he passed the bottle.

“Don’t take all night about it,” he said roughly.

The other was dawdling with the bottle, and Martin refused to wait for
him, tossing the glass off in a gulp and refilling it.

“Now, I can wait for you,” he said grimly; “but hurry up.”

Joe hurried, and they drank together.

“The work did it, eh?” Joe queried.

Martin refused to discuss the matter.

“It’s fair hell, I know,” the other went on, “but I kind of hate to see
you come off the wagon, Mart. Well, here’s how!”

Martin drank on silently, biting out his orders and invitations and
awing the barkeeper, an effeminate country youngster with watery blue
eyes and hair parted in the middle.

“It’s something scandalous the way they work us poor devils,” Joe was
remarking. “If I didn’t bowl up, I’d break loose an’ burn down the
shebang. My bowlin’ up is all that saves ’em, I can tell you that.”

But Martin made no answer. A few more drinks, and in his brain he felt
the maggots of intoxication beginning to crawl. Ah, it was living, the
first breath of life he had breathed in three weeks. His dreams came
back to him. Fancy came out of the darkened room and lured him on, a
thing of flaming brightness. His mirror of vision was silver-clear, a
flashing, dazzling palimpsest of imagery. Wonder and beauty walked with
him, hand in hand, and all power was his. He tried to tell it to Joe,
but Joe had visions of his own, infallible schemes whereby he would
escape the slavery of laundry-work and become himself the owner of a
great steam laundry.

“I tell yeh, Mart, they won’t be no kids workin’ in my laundry—not on
yer life. An’ they won’t be no workin’ a livin’ soul after six P.M. You
hear me talk! They’ll be machinery enough an’ hands enough to do it all
in decent workin’ hours, an’ Mart, s’help me, I’ll make yeh
superintendent of the shebang—the whole of it, all of it. Now here’s
the scheme. I get on the water-wagon an’ save my money for two
years—save an’ then—”

But Martin turned away, leaving him to tell it to the barkeeper, until
that worthy was called away to furnish drinks to two farmers who,
coming in, accepted Martin’s invitation. Martin dispensed royal
largess, inviting everybody up, farm-hands, a stableman, and the
gardener’s assistant from the hotel, the barkeeper, and the furtive
hobo who slid in like a shadow and like a shadow hovered at the end of
the bar.




CHAPTER XVIII.


Monday morning, Joe groaned over the first truck load of clothes to the
washer.

“I say,” he began.

“Don’t talk to me,” Martin snarled.

“I’m sorry, Joe,” he said at noon, when they knocked off for dinner.

Tears came into the other’s eyes.

“That’s all right, old man,” he said. “We’re in hell, an’ we can’t help
ourselves. An’, you know, I kind of like you a whole lot. That’s what
made it—hurt. I cottoned to you from the first.”

Martin shook his hand.

“Let’s quit,” Joe suggested. “Let’s chuck it, an’ go hoboin’. I ain’t
never tried it, but it must be dead easy. An’ nothin’ to do. Just think
of it, nothin’ to do. I was sick once, typhoid, in the hospital, an’ it
was beautiful. I wish I’d get sick again.”

The week dragged on. The hotel was full, and extra “fancy starch”
poured in upon them. They performed prodigies of valor. They fought
late each night under the electric lights, bolted their meals, and even
got in a half hour’s work before breakfast. Martin no longer took his
cold baths. Every moment was drive, drive, drive, and Joe was the
masterful shepherd of moments, herding them carefully, never losing
one, counting them over like a miser counting gold, working on in a
frenzy, toil-mad, a feverish machine, aided ably by that other machine
that thought of itself as once having been one Martin Eden, a man.

But it was only at rare moments that Martin was able to think. The
house of thought was closed, its windows boarded up, and he was its
shadowy caretaker. He was a shadow. Joe was right. They were both
shadows, and this was the unending limbo of toil. Or was it a dream?
Sometimes, in the steaming, sizzling heat, as he swung the heavy irons
back and forth over the white garments, it came to him that it was a
dream. In a short while, or maybe after a thousand years or so, he
would awake, in his little room with the ink-stained table, and take up
his writing where he had left off the day before. Or maybe that was a
dream, too, and the awakening would be the changing of the watches,
when he would drop down out of his bunk in the lurching forecastle and
go up on deck, under the tropic stars, and take the wheel and feel the
cool tradewind blowing through his flesh.

Came Saturday and its hollow victory at three o’clock.

“Guess I’ll go down an’ get a glass of beer,” Joe said, in the queer,
monotonous tones that marked his week-end collapse.

Martin seemed suddenly to wake up. He opened the kit bag and oiled his
wheel, putting graphite on the chain and adjusting the bearings. Joe
was halfway down to the saloon when Martin passed by, bending low over
the handle-bars, his legs driving the ninety-six gear with rhythmic
strength, his face set for seventy miles of road and grade and dust. He
slept in Oakland that night, and on Sunday covered the seventy miles
back. And on Monday morning, weary, he began the new week’s work, but
he had kept sober.

A fifth week passed, and a sixth, during which he lived and toiled as a
machine, with just a spark of something more in him, just a glimmering
bit of soul, that compelled him, at each week-end, to scorch off the
hundred and forty miles. But this was not rest. It was
super-machinelike, and it helped to crush out the glimmering bit of
soul that was all that was left him from former life. At the end of the
seventh week, without intending it, too weak to resist, he drifted down
to the village with Joe and drowned life and found life until Monday
morning.

Again, at the week-ends, he ground out the one hundred and forty miles,
obliterating the numbness of too great exertion by the numbness of
still greater exertion. At the end of three months he went down a third
time to the village with Joe. He forgot, and lived again, and, living,
he saw, in clear illumination, the beast he was making of himself—not
by the drink, but by the work. The drink was an effect, not a cause. It
followed inevitably upon the work, as the night follows upon the day.
Not by becoming a toil-beast could he win to the heights, was the
message the whiskey whispered to him, and he nodded approbation. The
whiskey was wise. It told secrets on itself.

He called for paper and pencil, and for drinks all around, and while
they drank his very good health, he clung to the bar and scribbled.

“A telegram, Joe,” he said. “Read it.”

Joe read it with a drunken, quizzical leer. But what he read seemed to
sober him. He looked at the other reproachfully, tears oozing into his
eyes and down his cheeks.

“You ain’t goin’ back on me, Mart?” he queried hopelessly.

Martin nodded, and called one of the loungers to him to take the
message to the telegraph office.

“Hold on,” Joe muttered thickly. “Lemme think.”

He held on to the bar, his legs wobbling under him, Martin’s arm around
him and supporting him, while he thought.

“Make that two laundrymen,” he said abruptly. “Here, lemme fix it.”

“What are you quitting for?” Martin demanded.

“Same reason as you.”

“But I’m going to sea. You can’t do that.”

“Nope,” was the answer, “but I can hobo all right, all right.”

Martin looked at him searchingly for a moment, then cried:-

“By God, I think you’re right! Better a hobo than a beast of toil. Why,
man, you’ll live. And that’s more than you ever did before.”

“I was in hospital, once,” Joe corrected. “It was beautiful.
Typhoid—did I tell you?”

While Martin changed the telegram to “two laundrymen,” Joe went on:-

“I never wanted to drink when I was in hospital. Funny, ain’t it? But
when I’ve ben workin’ like a slave all week, I just got to bowl up.
Ever noticed that cooks drink like hell?—an’ bakers, too? It’s the
work. They’ve sure got to. Here, lemme pay half of that telegram.”

“I’ll shake you for it,” Martin offered.

“Come on, everybody drink,” Joe called, as they rattled the dice and
rolled them out on the damp bar.

Monday morning Joe was wild with anticipation. He did not mind his
aching head, nor did he take interest in his work. Whole herds of
moments stole away and were lost while their careless shepherd gazed
out of the window at the sunshine and the trees.

“Just look at it!” he cried. “An’ it’s all mine! It’s free. I can lie
down under them trees an’ sleep for a thousan’ years if I want to. Aw,
come on, Mart, let’s chuck it. What’s the good of waitin’ another
moment. That’s the land of nothin’ to do out there, an’ I got a ticket
for it—an’ it ain’t no return ticket, b’gosh!”

A few minutes later, filling the truck with soiled clothes for the
washer, Joe spied the hotel manager’s shirt. He knew its mark, and with
a sudden glorious consciousness of freedom he threw it on the floor and
stamped on it.

“I wish you was in it, you pig-headed Dutchman!” he shouted. “In it,
an’ right there where I’ve got you! Take that! an’ that! an’ that! damn
you! Hold me back, somebody! Hold me back!”

Martin laughed and held him to his work. On Tuesday night the new
laundrymen arrived, and the rest of the week was spent breaking them
into the routine. Joe sat around and explained his system, but he did
no more work.

“Not a tap,” he announced. “Not a tap. They can fire me if they want
to, but if they do, I’ll quit. No more work in mine, thank you kindly.
Me for the freight cars an’ the shade under the trees. Go to it, you
slaves! That’s right. Slave an’ sweat! Slave an’ sweat! An’ when you’re
dead, you’ll rot the same as me, an’ what’s it matter how you live?—eh?
Tell me that—what’s it matter in the long run?”

On Saturday they drew their pay and came to the parting of the ways.

“They ain’t no use in me askin’ you to change your mind an’ hit the
road with me?” Joe asked hopelessly:

Martin shook his head. He was standing by his wheel, ready to start.
They shook hands, and Joe held on to his for a moment, as he said:-

“I’m goin’ to see you again, Mart, before you an’ me die. That’s
straight dope. I feel it in my bones. Good-by, Mart, an’ be good. I
like you like hell, you know.”

He stood, a forlorn figure, in the middle of the road, watching until
Martin turned a bend and was gone from sight.

“He’s a good Indian, that boy,” he muttered. “A good Indian.”

Then he plodded down the road himself, to the water tank, where half a
dozen empties lay on a side-track waiting for the up freight.




CHAPTER XIX.


Ruth and her family were home again, and Martin, returned to Oakland,
saw much of her. Having gained her degree, she was doing no more
studying; and he, having worked all vitality out of his mind and body,
was doing no writing. This gave them time for each other that they had
never had before, and their intimacy ripened fast.

At first, Martin had done nothing but rest. He had slept a great deal,
and spent long hours musing and thinking and doing nothing. He was like
one recovering from some terrible bout of hardship. The first signs of
reawakening came when he discovered more than languid interest in the
daily paper. Then he began to read again—light novels, and poetry; and
after several days more he was head over heels in his long-neglected
Fiske. His splendid body and health made new vitality, and he possessed
all the resiliency and rebound of youth.

Ruth showed her disappointment plainly when he announced that he was
going to sea for another voyage as soon as he was well rested.

“Why do you want to do that?” she asked.

“Money,” was the answer. “I’ll have to lay in a supply for my next
attack on the editors. Money is the sinews of war, in my case—money and
patience.”

“But if all you wanted was money, why didn’t you stay in the laundry?”

“Because the laundry was making a beast of me. Too much work of that
sort drives to drink.”

She stared at him with horror in her eyes.

“Do you mean—?” she quavered.

It would have been easy for him to get out of it; but his natural
impulse was for frankness, and he remembered his old resolve to be
frank, no matter what happened.

“Yes,” he answered. “Just that. Several times.”

She shivered and drew away from him.

“No man that I have ever known did that—ever did that.”

“Then they never worked in the laundry at Shelly Hot Springs,” he
laughed bitterly. “Toil is a good thing. It is necessary for human
health, so all the preachers say, and Heaven knows I’ve never been
afraid of it. But there is such a thing as too much of a good thing,
and the laundry up there is one of them. And that’s why I’m going to
sea one more voyage. It will be my last, I think, for when I come back,
I shall break into the magazines. I am certain of it.”

She was silent, unsympathetic, and he watched her moodily, realizing
how impossible it was for her to understand what he had been through.

“Some day I shall write it up—‘The Degradation of Toil’ or the
‘Psychology of Drink in the Working-class,’ or something like that for
a title.”

Never, since the first meeting, had they seemed so far apart as that
day. His confession, told in frankness, with the spirit of revolt
behind, had repelled her. But she was more shocked by the repulsion
itself than by the cause of it. It pointed out to her how near she had
drawn to him, and once accepted, it paved the way for greater intimacy.
Pity, too, was aroused, and innocent, idealistic thoughts of reform.
She would save this raw young man who had come so far. She would save
him from the curse of his early environment, and she would save him
from himself in spite of himself. And all this affected her as a very
noble state of consciousness; nor did she dream that behind it and
underlying it were the jealousy and desire of love.

They rode on their wheels much in the delightful fall weather, and out
in the hills they read poetry aloud, now one and now the other, noble,
uplifting poetry that turned one’s thoughts to higher things.
Renunciation, sacrifice, patience, industry, and high endeavor were the
principles she thus indirectly preached—such abstractions being
objectified in her mind by her father, and Mr. Butler, and by Andrew
Carnegie, who, from a poor immigrant boy had arisen to be the
book-giver of the world. All of which was appreciated and enjoyed by
Martin. He followed her mental processes more clearly now, and her soul
was no longer the sealed wonder it had been. He was on terms of
intellectual equality with her. But the points of disagreement did not
affect his love. His love was more ardent than ever, for he loved her
for what she was, and even her physical frailty was an added charm in
his eyes. He read of sickly Elizabeth Barrett, who for years had not
placed her feet upon the ground, until that day of flame when she
eloped with Browning and stood upright, upon the earth, under the open
sky; and what Browning had done for her, Martin decided he could do for
Ruth. But first, she must love him. The rest would be easy. He would
give her strength and health. And he caught glimpses of their life, in
the years to come, wherein, against a background of work and comfort
and general well-being, he saw himself and Ruth reading and discussing
poetry, she propped amid a multitude of cushions on the ground while
she read aloud to him. This was the key to the life they would live.
And always he saw that particular picture. Sometimes it was she who
leaned against him while he read, one arm about her, her head upon his
shoulder. Sometimes they pored together over the printed pages of
beauty. Then, too, she loved nature, and with generous imagination he
changed the scene of their reading—sometimes they read in closed-in
valleys with precipitous walls, or in high mountain meadows, and,
again, down by the gray sand-dunes with a wreath of billows at their
feet, or afar on some volcanic tropic isle where waterfalls descended
and became mist, reaching the sea in vapor veils that swayed and
shivered to every vagrant wisp of wind. But always, in the foreground,
lords of beauty and eternally reading and sharing, lay he and Ruth, and
always in the background that was beyond the background of nature, dim
and hazy, were work and success and money earned that made them free of
the world and all its treasures.

“I should recommend my little girl to be careful,” her mother warned
her one day.

“I know what you mean. But it is impossible. He is not—”

Ruth was blushing, but it was the blush of maidenhood called upon for
the first time to discuss the sacred things of life with a mother held
equally sacred.

“Your kind.” Her mother finished the sentence for her.

Ruth nodded.

“I did not want to say it, but he is not. He is rough, brutal,
strong—too strong. He has not—”

She hesitated and could not go on. It was a new experience, talking
over such matters with her mother. And again her mother completed her
thought for her.

“He has not lived a clean life, is what you wanted to say.”

Again Ruth nodded, and again a blush mantled her face.

“It is just that,” she said. “It has not been his fault, but he has
played much with—”

“With pitch?”

“Yes, with pitch. And he frightens me. Sometimes I am positively in
terror of him, when he talks in that free and easy way of the things he
has done—as if they did not matter. They do matter, don’t they?”

They sat with their arms twined around each other, and in the pause her
mother patted her hand and waited for her to go on.

“But I am interested in him dreadfully,” she continued. “In a way he is
my protégé. Then, too, he is my first boy friend—but not exactly
friend; rather protégé and friend combined. Sometimes, too, when he
frightens me, it seems that he is a bulldog I have taken for a
plaything, like some of the ‘frat’ girls, and he is tugging hard, and
showing his teeth, and threatening to break loose.”

Again her mother waited.

“He interests me, I suppose, like the bulldog. And there is much good
in him, too; but there is much in him that I would not like in—in the
other way. You see, I have been thinking. He swears, he smokes, he
drinks, he has fought with his fists (he has told me so, and he likes
it; he says so). He is all that a man should not be—a man I would want
for my—” her voice sank very low—“husband. Then he is too strong. My
prince must be tall, and slender, and dark—a graceful, bewitching
prince. No, there is no danger of my falling in love with Martin Eden.
It would be the worst fate that could befall me.”

“But it is not that that I spoke about,” her mother equivocated. “Have
you thought about him? He is so ineligible in every way, you know, and
suppose he should come to love you?”

“But he does—already,” she cried.

“It was to be expected,” Mrs. Morse said gently. “How could it be
otherwise with any one who knew you?”

“Olney hates me!” she exclaimed passionately. “And I hate Olney. I feel
always like a cat when he is around. I feel that I must be nasty to
him, and even when I don’t happen to feel that way, why, he’s nasty to
me, anyway. But I am happy with Martin Eden. No one ever loved me
before—no man, I mean, in that way. And it is sweet to be loved—that
way. You know what I mean, mother dear. It is sweet to feel that you
are really and truly a woman.” She buried her face in her mother’s lap,
sobbing. “You think I am dreadful, I know, but I am honest, and I tell
you just how I feel.”

Mrs. Morse was strangely sad and happy. Her child-daughter, who was a
bachelor of arts, was gone; but in her place was a woman-daughter. The
experiment had succeeded. The strange void in Ruth’s nature had been
filled, and filled without danger or penalty. This rough sailor-fellow
had been the instrument, and, though Ruth did not love him, he had made
her conscious of her womanhood.

“His hand trembles,” Ruth was confessing, her face, for shame’s sake,
still buried. “It is most amusing and ridiculous, but I feel sorry for
him, too. And when his hands are too trembly, and his eyes too shiny,
why, I lecture him about his life and the wrong way he is going about
it to mend it. But he worships me, I know. His eyes and his hands do
not lie. And it makes me feel grown-up, the thought of it, the very
thought of it; and I feel that I am possessed of something that is by
rights my own—that makes me like the other girls—and—and young women.
And, then, too, I knew that I was not like them before, and I knew that
it worried you. You thought you did not let me know that dear worry of
yours, but I did, and I wanted to—‘to make good,’ as Martin Eden says.”

It was a holy hour for mother and daughter, and their eyes were wet as
they talked on in the twilight, Ruth all white innocence and frankness,
her mother sympathetic, receptive, yet calmly explaining and guiding.

“He is four years younger than you,” she said. “He has no place in the
world. He has neither position nor salary. He is impractical. Loving
you, he should, in the name of common sense, be doing something that
would give him the right to marry, instead of paltering around with
those stories of his and with childish dreams. Martin Eden, I am
afraid, will never grow up. He does not take to responsibility and a
man’s work in the world like your father did, or like all our friends,
Mr. Butler for one. Martin Eden, I am afraid, will never be a
money-earner. And this world is so ordered that money is necessary to
happiness—oh, no, not these swollen fortunes, but enough of money to
permit of common comfort and decency. He—he has never spoken?”

“He has not breathed a word. He has not attempted to; but if he did, I
would not let him, because, you see, I do not love him.”

“I am glad of that. I should not care to see my daughter, my one
daughter, who is so clean and pure, love a man like him. There are
noble men in the world who are clean and true and manly. Wait for them.
You will find one some day, and you will love him and be loved by him,
and you will be happy with him as your father and I have been happy
with each other. And there is one thing you must always carry in mind—”

“Yes, mother.”

Mrs. Morse’s voice was low and sweet as she said, “And that is the
children.”

“I—have thought about them,” Ruth confessed, remembering the wanton
thoughts that had vexed her in the past, her face again red with maiden
shame that she should be telling such things.

“And it is that, the children, that makes Mr. Eden impossible,” Mrs.
Morse went on incisively. “Their heritage must be clean, and he is, I
am afraid, not clean. Your father has told me of sailors’ lives,
and—and you understand.”

Ruth pressed her mother’s hand in assent, feeling that she really did
understand, though her conception was of something vague, remote, and
terrible that was beyond the scope of imagination.

“You know I do nothing without telling you,” she began. “—Only,
sometimes you must ask me, like this time. I wanted to tell you, but I
did not know how. It is false modesty, I know it is that, but you can
make it easy for me. Sometimes, like this time, you must ask me, you
must give me a chance.”

“Why, mother, you are a woman, too!” she cried exultantly, as they
stood up, catching her mother’s hands and standing erect, facing her in
the twilight, conscious of a strangely sweet equality between them. “I
should never have thought of you in that way if we had not had this
talk. I had to learn that I was a woman to know that you were one,
too.”

“We are women together,” her mother said, drawing her to her and
kissing her. “We are women together,” she repeated, as they went out of
the room, their arms around each other’s waists, their hearts swelling
with a new sense of companionship.

“Our little girl has become a woman,” Mrs. Morse said proudly to her
husband an hour later.

“That means,” he said, after a long look at his wife, “that means she
is in love.”

“No, but that she is loved,” was the smiling rejoinder. “The experiment
has succeeded. She is awakened at last.”

“Then we’ll have to get rid of him.” Mr. Morse spoke briskly, in
matter-of-fact, businesslike tones.

But his wife shook her head. “It will not be necessary. Ruth says he is
going to sea in a few days. When he comes back, she will not be here.
We will send her to Aunt Clara’s. And, besides, a year in the East,
with the change in climate, people, ideas, and everything, is just the
thing she needs.”




CHAPTER XX.


The desire to write was stirring in Martin once more. Stories and poems
were springing into spontaneous creation in his brain, and he made
notes of them against the future time when he would give them
expression. But he did not write. This was his little vacation; he had
resolved to devote it to rest and love, and in both matters he
prospered. He was soon spilling over with vitality, and each day he saw
Ruth, at the moment of meeting, she experienced the old shock of his
strength and health.

“Be careful,” her mother warned her once again. “I am afraid you are
seeing too much of Martin Eden.”

But Ruth laughed from security. She was sure of herself, and in a few
days he would be off to sea. Then, by the time he returned, she would
be away on her visit East. There was a magic, however, in the strength
and health of Martin. He, too, had been told of her contemplated
Eastern trip, and he felt the need for haste. Yet he did not know how
to make love to a girl like Ruth. Then, too, he was handicapped by the
possession of a great fund of experience with girls and women who had
been absolutely different from her. They had known about love and life
and flirtation, while she knew nothing about such things. Her
prodigious innocence appalled him, freezing on his lips all ardors of
speech, and convincing him, in spite of himself, of his own
unworthiness. Also he was handicapped in another way. He had himself
never been in love before. He had liked women in that turgid past of
his, and been fascinated by some of them, but he had not known what it
was to love them. He had whistled in a masterful, careless way, and
they had come to him. They had been diversions, incidents, part of the
game men play, but a small part at most. And now, and for the first
time, he was a suppliant, tender and timid and doubting. He did not
know the way of love, nor its speech, while he was frightened at his
loved one’s clear innocence.

In the course of getting acquainted with a varied world, whirling on
through the ever changing phases of it, he had learned a rule of
conduct which was to the effect that when one played a strange game, he
should let the other fellow play first. This had stood him in good
stead a thousand times and trained him as an observer as well. He knew
how to watch the thing that was strange, and to wait for a weakness,
for a place of entrance, to divulge itself. It was like sparring for an
opening in fist-fighting. And when such an opening came, he knew by
long experience to play for it and to play hard.

So he waited with Ruth and watched, desiring to speak his love but not
daring. He was afraid of shocking her, and he was not sure of himself.
Had he but known it, he was following the right course with her. Love
came into the world before articulate speech, and in its own early
youth it had learned ways and means that it had never forgotten. It was
in this old, primitive way that Martin wooed Ruth. He did not know he
was doing it at first, though later he divined it. The touch of his
hand on hers was vastly more potent than any word he could utter, the
impact of his strength on her imagination was more alluring than the
printed poems and spoken passions of a thousand generations of lovers.
Whatever his tongue could express would have appealed, in part, to her
judgment; but the touch of hand, the fleeting contact, made its way
directly to her instinct. Her judgment was as young as she, but her
instincts were as old as the race and older. They had been young when
love was young, and they were wiser than convention and opinion and all
the new-born things. So her judgment did not act. There was no call
upon it, and she did not realize the strength of the appeal Martin made
from moment to moment to her love-nature. That he loved her, on the
other hand, was as clear as day, and she consciously delighted in
beholding his love-manifestations—the glowing eyes with their tender
lights, the trembling hands, and the never failing swarthy flush that
flooded darkly under his sunburn. She even went farther, in a timid way
inciting him, but doing it so delicately that he never suspected, and
doing it half-consciously, so that she scarcely suspected herself. She
thrilled with these proofs of her power that proclaimed her a woman,
and she took an Eve-like delight in tormenting him and playing upon
him.

Tongue-tied by inexperience and by excess of ardor, wooing unwittingly
and awkwardly, Martin continued his approach by contact. The touch of
his hand was pleasant to her, and something deliciously more than
pleasant. Martin did not know it, but he did know that it was not
distasteful to her. Not that they touched hands often, save at meeting
and parting; but that in handling the bicycles, in strapping on the
books of verse they carried into the hills, and in conning the pages of
books side by side, there were opportunities for hand to stray against
hand. And there were opportunities, too, for her hair to brush his
cheek, and for shoulder to touch shoulder, as they leaned together over
the beauty of the books. She smiled to herself at vagrant impulses
which arose from nowhere and suggested that she rumple his hair; while
he desired greatly, when they tired of reading, to rest his head in her
lap and dream with closed eyes about the future that was to be theirs.
On Sunday picnics at Shellmound Park and Schuetzen Park, in the past,
he had rested his head on many laps, and, usually, he had slept soundly
and selfishly while the girls shaded his face from the sun and looked
down and loved him and wondered at his lordly carelessness of their
love. To rest his head in a girl’s lap had been the easiest thing in
the world until now, and now he found Ruth’s lap inaccessible and
impossible. Yet it was right here, in his reticence, that the strength
of his wooing lay. It was because of this reticence that he never
alarmed her. Herself fastidious and timid, she never awakened to the
perilous trend of their intercourse. Subtly and unaware she grew toward
him and closer to him, while he, sensing the growing closeness, longed
to dare but was afraid.

Once he dared, one afternoon, when he found her in the darkened living
room with a blinding headache.

“Nothing can do it any good,” she had answered his inquiries. “And
besides, I don’t take headache powders. Doctor Hall won’t permit me.”

“I can cure it, I think, and without drugs,” was Martin’s answer. “I am
not sure, of course, but I’d like to try. It’s simply massage. I
learned the trick first from the Japanese. They are a race of masseurs,
you know. Then I learned it all over again with variations from the
Hawaiians. They call it _lomi-lomi_. It can accomplish most of the
things drugs accomplish and a few things that drugs can’t.”

Scarcely had his hands touched her head when she sighed deeply.

“That is so good,” she said.

She spoke once again, half an hour later, when she asked, “Aren’t you
tired?”

The question was perfunctory, and she knew what the answer would be.
Then she lost herself in drowsy contemplation of the soothing balm of
his strength: Life poured from the ends of his fingers, driving the
pain before it, or so it seemed to her, until with the easement of
pain, she fell asleep and he stole away.

She called him up by telephone that evening to thank him.

“I slept until dinner,” she said. “You cured me completely, Mr. Eden,
and I don’t know how to thank you.”

He was warm, and bungling of speech, and very happy, as he replied to
her, and there was dancing in his mind, throughout the telephone
conversation, the memory of Browning and of sickly Elizabeth Barrett.
What had been done could be done again, and he, Martin Eden, could do
it and would do it for Ruth Morse. He went back to his room and to the
volume of Spencer’s “Sociology” lying open on the bed. But he could not
read. Love tormented him and overrode his will, so that, despite all
determination, he found himself at the little ink-stained table. The
sonnet he composed that night was the first of a love-cycle of fifty
sonnets which was completed within two months. He had the “Love-sonnets
from the Portuguese” in mind as he wrote, and he wrote under the best
conditions for great work, at a climacteric of living, in the throes of
his own sweet love-madness.

The many hours he was not with Ruth he devoted to the “Love-cycle,” to
reading at home, or to the public reading-rooms, where he got more
closely in touch with the magazines of the day and the nature of their
policy and content. The hours he spent with Ruth were maddening alike
in promise and in inconclusiveness. It was a week after he cured her
headache that a moonlight sail on Lake Merritt was proposed by Norman
and seconded by Arthur and Olney. Martin was the only one capable of
handling a boat, and he was pressed into service. Ruth sat near him in
the stern, while the three young fellows lounged amidships, deep in a
wordy wrangle over “frat” affairs.

The moon had not yet risen, and Ruth, gazing into the starry vault of
the sky and exchanging no speech with Martin, experienced a sudden
feeling of loneliness. She glanced at him. A puff of wind was heeling
the boat over till the deck was awash, and he, one hand on tiller and
the other on main-sheet, was luffing slightly, at the same time peering
ahead to make out the near-lying north shore. He was unaware of her
gaze, and she watched him intently, speculating fancifully about the
strange warp of soul that led him, a young man with signal powers, to
fritter away his time on the writing of stories and poems foredoomed to
mediocrity and failure.

Her eyes wandered along the strong throat, dimly seen in the starlight,
and over the firm-poised head, and the old desire to lay her hands upon
his neck came back to her. The strength she abhorred attracted her. Her
feeling of loneliness became more pronounced, and she felt tired. Her
position on the heeling boat irked her, and she remembered the headache
he had cured and the soothing rest that resided in him. He was sitting
beside her, quite beside her, and the boat seemed to tilt her toward
him. Then arose in her the impulse to lean against him, to rest herself
against his strength—a vague, half-formed impulse, which, even as she
considered it, mastered her and made her lean toward him. Or was it the
heeling of the boat? She did not know. She never knew. She knew only
that she was leaning against him and that the easement and soothing
rest were very good. Perhaps it had been the boat’s fault, but she made
no effort to retrieve it. She leaned lightly against his shoulder, but
she leaned, and she continued to lean when he shifted his position to
make it more comfortable for her.

It was a madness, but she refused to consider the madness. She was no
longer herself but a woman, with a woman’s clinging need; and though
she leaned ever so lightly, the need seemed satisfied. She was no
longer tired. Martin did not speak. Had he, the spell would have been
broken. But his reticence of love prolonged it. He was dazed and dizzy.
He could not understand what was happening. It was too wonderful to be
anything but a delirium. He conquered a mad desire to let go sheet and
tiller and to clasp her in his arms. His intuition told him it was the
wrong thing to do, and he was glad that sheet and tiller kept his hands
occupied and fended off temptation. But he luffed the boat less
delicately, spilling the wind shamelessly from the sail so as to
prolong the tack to the north shore. The shore would compel him to go
about, and the contact would be broken. He sailed with skill, stopping
way on the boat without exciting the notice of the wranglers, and
mentally forgiving his hardest voyages in that they had made this
marvellous night possible, giving him mastery over sea and boat and
wind so that he could sail with her beside him, her dear weight against
him on his shoulder.

When the first light of the rising moon touched the sail, illuminating
the boat with pearly radiance, Ruth moved away from him. And, even as
she moved, she felt him move away. The impulse to avoid detection was
mutual. The episode was tacitly and secretly intimate. She sat apart
from him with burning cheeks, while the full force of it came home to
her. She had been guilty of something she would not have her brothers
see, nor Olney see. Why had she done it? She had never done anything
like it in her life, and yet she had been moonlight-sailing with young
men before. She had never desired to do anything like it. She was
overcome with shame and with the mystery of her own burgeoning
womanhood. She stole a glance at Martin, who was busy putting the boat
about on the other tack, and she could have hated him for having made
her do an immodest and shameful thing. And he, of all men! Perhaps her
mother was right, and she was seeing too much of him. It would never
happen again, she resolved, and she would see less of him in the
future. She entertained a wild idea of explaining to him the first time
they were alone together, of lying to him, of mentioning casually the
attack of faintness that had overpowered her just before the moon came
up. Then she remembered how they had drawn mutually away before the
revealing moon, and she knew he would know it for a lie.

In the days that swiftly followed she was no longer herself but a
strange, puzzling creature, wilful over judgment and scornful of
self-analysis, refusing to peer into the future or to think about
herself and whither she was drifting. She was in a fever of tingling
mystery, alternately frightened and charmed, and in constant
bewilderment. She had one idea firmly fixed, however, which insured her
security. She would not let Martin speak his love. As long as she did
this, all would be well. In a few days he would be off to sea. And even
if he did speak, all would be well. It could not be otherwise, for she
did not love him. Of course, it would be a painful half hour for him,
and an embarrassing half hour for her, because it would be her first
proposal. She thrilled deliciously at the thought. She was really a
woman, with a man ripe to ask for her in marriage. It was a lure to all
that was fundamental in her sex. The fabric of her life, of all that
constituted her, quivered and grew tremulous. The thought fluttered in
her mind like a flame-attracted moth. She went so far as to imagine
Martin proposing, herself putting the words into his mouth; and she
rehearsed her refusal, tempering it with kindness and exhorting him to
true and noble manhood. And especially he must stop smoking cigarettes.
She would make a point of that. But no, she must not let him speak at
all. She could stop him, and she had told her mother that she would.
All flushed and burning, she regretfully dismissed the conjured
situation. Her first proposal would have to be deferred to a more
propitious time and a more eligible suitor.




CHAPTER XXI.


Came a beautiful fall day, warm and languid, palpitant with the hush of
the changing season, a California Indian summer day, with hazy sun and
wandering wisps of breeze that did not stir the slumber of the air.
Filmy purple mists, that were not vapors but fabrics woven of color,
hid in the recesses of the hills. San Francisco lay like a blur of
smoke upon her heights. The intervening bay was a dull sheen of molten
metal, whereon sailing craft lay motionless or drifted with the lazy
tide. Far Tamalpais, barely seen in the silver haze, bulked hugely by
the Golden Gate, the latter a pale gold pathway under the westering
sun. Beyond, the Pacific, dim and vast, was raising on its sky-line
tumbled cloud-masses that swept landward, giving warning of the first
blustering breath of winter.

The erasure of summer was at hand. Yet summer lingered, fading and
fainting among her hills, deepening the purple of her valleys, spinning
a shroud of haze from waning powers and sated raptures, dying with the
calm content of having lived and lived well. And among the hills, on
their favorite knoll, Martin and Ruth sat side by side, their heads
bent over the same pages, he reading aloud from the love-sonnets of the
woman who had loved Browning as it is given to few men to be loved.

But the reading languished. The spell of passing beauty all about them
was too strong. The golden year was dying as it had lived, a beautiful
and unrepentant voluptuary, and reminiscent rapture and content
freighted heavily the air. It entered into them, dreamy and languorous,
weakening the fibres of resolution, suffusing the face of morality, or
of judgment, with haze and purple mist. Martin felt tender and melting,
and from time to time warm glows passed over him. His head was very
near to hers, and when wandering phantoms of breeze stirred her hair so
that it touched his face, the printed pages swam before his eyes.

“I don’t believe you know a word of what you are reading,” she said
once when he had lost his place.

He looked at her with burning eyes, and was on the verge of becoming
awkward, when a retort came to his lips.

“I don’t believe you know either. What was the last sonnet about?”

“I don’t know,” she laughed frankly. “I’ve already forgotten. Don’t let
us read any more. The day is too beautiful.”

“It will be our last in the hills for some time,” he announced gravely.
“There’s a storm gathering out there on the sea-rim.”

The book slipped from his hands to the ground, and they sat idly and
silently, gazing out over the dreamy bay with eyes that dreamed and did
not see. Ruth glanced sidewise at his neck. She did not lean toward
him. She was drawn by some force outside of herself and stronger than
gravitation, strong as destiny. It was only an inch to lean, and it was
accomplished without volition on her part. Her shoulder touched his as
lightly as a butterfly touches a flower, and just as lightly was the
counter-pressure. She felt his shoulder press hers, and a tremor run
through him. Then was the time for her to draw back. But she had become
an automaton. Her actions had passed beyond the control of her will—she
never thought of control or will in the delicious madness that was upon
her. His arm began to steal behind her and around her. She waited its
slow progress in a torment of delight. She waited, she knew not for
what, panting, with dry, burning lips, a leaping pulse, and a fever of
expectancy in all her blood. The girdling arm lifted higher and drew
her toward him, drew her slowly and caressingly. She could wait no
longer. With a tired sigh, and with an impulsive movement all her own,
unpremeditated, spasmodic, she rested her head upon his breast. His
head bent over swiftly, and, as his lips approached, hers flew to meet
them.

This must be love, she thought, in the one rational moment that was
vouchsafed her. If it was not love, it was too shameful. It could be
nothing else than love. She loved the man whose arms were around her
and whose lips were pressed to hers. She pressed more tightly to him,
with a snuggling movement of her body. And a moment later, tearing
herself half out of his embrace, suddenly and exultantly she reached up
and placed both hands upon Martin Eden’s sunburnt neck. So exquisite
was the pang of love and desire fulfilled that she uttered a low moan,
relaxed her hands, and lay half-swooning in his arms.

Not a word had been spoken, and not a word was spoken for a long time.
Twice he bent and kissed her, and each time her lips met his shyly and
her body made its happy, nestling movement. She clung to him, unable to
release herself, and he sat, half supporting her in his arms, as he
gazed with unseeing eyes at the blur of the great city across the bay.
For once there were no visions in his brain. Only colors and lights and
glows pulsed there, warm as the day and warm as his love. He bent over
her. She was speaking.

“When did you love me?” she whispered.

“From the first, the very first, the first moment I laid eye on you. I
was mad for love of you then, and in all the time that has passed since
then I have only grown the madder. I am maddest, now, dear. I am almost
a lunatic, my head is so turned with joy.”

“I am glad I am a woman, Martin—dear,” she said, after a long sigh.

He crushed her in his arms again and again, and then asked:-

“And you? When did you first know?”

“Oh, I knew it all the time, almost, from the first.”

“And I have been as blind as a bat!” he cried, a ring of vexation in
his voice. “I never dreamed it until just how, when I—when I kissed
you.”

“I didn’t mean that.” She drew herself partly away and looked at him.
“I meant I knew you loved almost from the first.”

“And you?” he demanded.

“It came to me suddenly.” She was speaking very slowly, her eyes warm
and fluttery and melting, a soft flush on her cheeks that did not go
away. “I never knew until just now when—you put your arms around me.
And I never expected to marry you, Martin, not until just now. How did
you make me love you?”

“I don’t know,” he laughed, “unless just by loving you, for I loved you
hard enough to melt the heart of a stone, much less the heart of the
living, breathing woman you are.”

“This is so different from what I thought love would be,” she announced
irrelevantly.

“What did you think it would be like?”

“I didn’t think it would be like this.” She was looking into his eyes
at the moment, but her own dropped as she continued, “You see, I didn’t
know what this was like.”

He offered to draw her toward him again, but it was no more than a
tentative muscular movement of the girdling arm, for he feared that he
might be greedy. Then he felt her body yielding, and once again she was
close in his arms and lips were pressed on lips.

“What will my people say?” she queried, with sudden apprehension, in
one of the pauses.

“I don’t know. We can find out very easily any time we are so minded.”

“But if mamma objects? I am sure I am afraid to tell her.”

“Let me tell her,” he volunteered valiantly. “I think your mother does
not like me, but I can win her around. A fellow who can win you can win
anything. And if we don’t—”

“Yes?”

“Why, we’ll have each other. But there’s no danger not winning your
mother to our marriage. She loves you too well.”

“I should not like to break her heart,” Ruth said pensively.

He felt like assuring her that mothers’ hearts were not so easily
broken, but instead he said, “And love is the greatest thing in the
world.”

“Do you know, Martin, you sometimes frighten me. I am frightened now,
when I think of you and of what you have been. You must be very, very
good to me. Remember, after all, that I am only a child. I never loved
before.”

“Nor I. We are both children together. And we are fortunate above most,
for we have found our first love in each other.”

“But that is impossible!” she cried, withdrawing herself from his arms
with a swift, passionate movement. “Impossible for you. You have been a
sailor, and sailors, I have heard, are—are—”

Her voice faltered and died away.

“Are addicted to having a wife in every port?” he suggested. “Is that
what you mean?”

“Yes,” she answered in a low voice.

“But that is not love.” He spoke authoritatively. “I have been in many
ports, but I never knew a passing touch of love until I saw you that
first night. Do you know, when I said good night and went away, I was
almost arrested.”

“Arrested?”

“Yes. The policeman thought I was drunk; and I was, too—with love for
you.”

“But you said we were children, and I said it was impossible, for you,
and we have strayed away from the point.”

“I said that I never loved anybody but you,” he replied. “You are my
first, my very first.”

“And yet you have been a sailor,” she objected.

“But that doesn’t prevent me from loving you the first.”

“And there have been women—other women—oh!”

And to Martin Eden’s supreme surprise, she burst into a storm of tears
that took more kisses than one and many caresses to drive away. And all
the while there was running through his head Kipling’s line: “_And the
Colonel’s lady and Judy O’Grady are sisters under their skins_.” It was
true, he decided; though the novels he had read had led him to believe
otherwise. His idea, for which the novels were responsible, had been
that only formal proposals obtained in the upper classes. It was all
right enough, down whence he had come, for youths and maidens to win
each other by contact; but for the exalted personages up above on the
heights to make love in similar fashion had seemed unthinkable. Yet the
novels were wrong. Here was a proof of it. The same pressures and
caresses, unaccompanied by speech, that were efficacious with the girls
of the working-class, were equally efficacious with the girls above the
working-class. They were all of the same flesh, after all, sisters
under their skins; and he might have known as much himself had he
remembered his Spencer. As he held Ruth in his arms and soothed her, he
took great consolation in the thought that the Colonel’s lady and Judy
O’Grady were pretty much alike under their skins. It brought Ruth
closer to him, made her possible. Her dear flesh was as anybody’s
flesh, as his flesh. There was no bar to their marriage. Class
difference was the only difference, and class was extrinsic. It could
be shaken off. A slave, he had read, had risen to the Roman purple.
That being so, then he could rise to Ruth. Under her purity, and
saintliness, and culture, and ethereal beauty of soul, she was, in
things fundamentally human, just like Lizzie Connolly and all Lizzie
Connollys. All that was possible of them was possible of her. She could
love, and hate, maybe have hysterics; and she could certainly be
jealous, as she was jealous now, uttering her last sobs in his arms.

“Besides, I am older than you,” she remarked suddenly, opening her eyes
and looking up at him, “three years older.”

“Hush, you are only a child, and I am forty years older than you, in
experience,” was his answer.

In truth, they were children together, so far as love was concerned,
and they were as naive and immature in the expression of their love as
a pair of children, and this despite the fact that she was crammed with
a university education and that his head was full of scientific
philosophy and the hard facts of life.

They sat on through the passing glory of the day, talking as lovers are
prone to talk, marvelling at the wonder of love and at destiny that had
flung them so strangely together, and dogmatically believing that they
loved to a degree never attained by lovers before. And they returned
insistently, again and again, to a rehearsal of their first impressions
of each other and to hopeless attempts to analyze just precisely what
they felt for each other and how much there was of it.

The cloud-masses on the western horizon received the descending sun,
and the circle of the sky turned to rose, while the zenith glowed with
the same warm color. The rosy light was all about them, flooding over
them, as she sang, “Good-by, Sweet Day.” She sang softly, leaning in
the cradle of his arm, her hands in his, their hearts in each other’s
hands.




CHAPTER XXII.


Mrs. Morse did not require a mother’s intuition to read the
advertisement in Ruth’s face when she returned home. The flush that
would not leave the cheeks told the simple story, and more eloquently
did the eyes, large and bright, reflecting an unmistakable inward
glory.

“What has happened?” Mrs. Morse asked, having bided her time till Ruth
had gone to bed.

“You know?” Ruth queried, with trembling lips.

For reply, her mother’s arm went around her, and a hand was softly
caressing her hair.

“He did not speak,” she blurted out. “I did not intend that it should
happen, and I would never have let him speak—only he didn’t speak.”

“But if he did not speak, then nothing could have happened, could it?”

“But it did, just the same.”

“In the name of goodness, child, what are you babbling about?” Mrs.
Morse was bewildered. “I don’t think I know what happened, after all.
What did happen?”

Ruth looked at her mother in surprise.

“I thought you knew. Why, we’re engaged, Martin and I.”

Mrs. Morse laughed with incredulous vexation.

“No, he didn’t speak,” Ruth explained. “He just loved me, that was all.
I was as surprised as you are. He didn’t say a word. He just put his
arm around me. And—and I was not myself. And he kissed me, and I kissed
him. I couldn’t help it. I just had to. And then I knew I loved him.”

She paused, waiting with expectancy the benediction of her mother’s
kiss, but Mrs. Morse was coldly silent.

“It is a dreadful accident, I know,” Ruth recommenced with a sinking
voice. “And I don’t know how you will ever forgive me. But I couldn’t
help it. I did not dream that I loved him until that moment. And you
must tell father for me.”

“Would it not be better not to tell your father? Let me see Martin
Eden, and talk with him, and explain. He will understand and release
you.”

“No! no!” Ruth cried, starting up. “I do not want to be released. I
love him, and love is very sweet. I am going to marry him—of course, if
you will let me.”

“We have other plans for you, Ruth, dear, your father and I—oh, no, no;
no man picked out for you, or anything like that. Our plans go no
farther than your marrying some man in your own station in life, a good
and honorable gentleman, whom you will select yourself, when you love
him.”

“But I love Martin already,” was the plaintive protest.

“We would not influence your choice in any way; but you are our
daughter, and we could not bear to see you make a marriage such as
this. He has nothing but roughness and coarseness to offer you in
exchange for all that is refined and delicate in you. He is no match
for you in any way. He could not support you. We have no foolish ideas
about wealth, but comfort is another matter, and our daughter should at
least marry a man who can give her that—and not a penniless adventurer,
a sailor, a cowboy, a smuggler, and Heaven knows what else, who, in
addition to everything, is hare-brained and irresponsible.”

Ruth was silent. Every word she recognized as true.

“He wastes his time over his writing, trying to accomplish what
geniuses and rare men with college educations sometimes accomplish. A
man thinking of marriage should be preparing for marriage. But not he.
As I have said, and I know you agree with me, he is irresponsible. And
why should he not be? It is the way of sailors. He has never learned to
be economical or temperate. The spendthrift years have marked him. It
is not his fault, of course, but that does not alter his nature. And
have you thought of the years of licentiousness he inevitably has
lived? Have you thought of that, daughter? You know what marriage
means.”

Ruth shuddered and clung close to her mother.

“I have thought.” Ruth waited a long time for the thought to frame
itself. “And it is terrible. It sickens me to think of it. I told you
it was a dreadful accident, my loving him; but I can’t help myself.
Could you help loving father? Then it is the same with me. There is
something in me, in him—I never knew it was there until to-day—but it
is there, and it makes me love him. I never thought to love him, but,
you see, I do,” she concluded, a certain faint triumph in her voice.

They talked long, and to little purpose, in conclusion agreeing to wait
an indeterminate time without doing anything.

The same conclusion was reached, a little later that night, between
Mrs. Morse and her husband, after she had made due confession of the
miscarriage of her plans.

“It could hardly have come otherwise,” was Mr. Morse’s judgment. “This
sailor-fellow has been the only man she was in touch with. Sooner or
later she was going to awaken anyway; and she did awaken, and lo! here
was this sailor-fellow, the only accessible man at the moment, and of
course she promptly loved him, or thought she did, which amounts to the
same thing.”

Mrs. Morse took it upon herself to work slowly and indirectly upon
Ruth, rather than to combat her. There would be plenty of time for
this, for Martin was not in position to marry.

“Let her see all she wants of him,” was Mr. Morse’s advice. “The more
she knows him, the less she’ll love him, I wager. And give her plenty
of contrast. Make a point of having young people at the house. Young
women and young men, all sorts of young men, clever men, men who have
done something or who are doing things, men of her own class,
gentlemen. She can gauge him by them. They will show him up for what he
is. And after all, he is a mere boy of twenty-one. Ruth is no more than
a child. It is calf love with the pair of them, and they will grow out
of it.”

So the matter rested. Within the family it was accepted that Ruth and
Martin were engaged, but no announcement was made. The family did not
think it would ever be necessary. Also, it was tacitly understood that
it was to be a long engagement. They did not ask Martin to go to work,
nor to cease writing. They did not intend to encourage him to mend
himself. And he aided and abetted them in their unfriendly designs, for
going to work was farthest from his thoughts.

“I wonder if you’ll like what I have done!” he said to Ruth several
days later. “I’ve decided that boarding with my sister is too
expensive, and I am going to board myself. I’ve rented a little room
out in North Oakland, retired neighborhood and all the rest, you know,
and I’ve bought an oil-burner on which to cook.”

Ruth was overjoyed. The oil-burner especially pleased her.

“That was the way Mr. Butler began his start,” she said.

Martin frowned inwardly at the citation of that worthy gentleman, and
went on: “I put stamps on all my manuscripts and started them off to
the editors again. Then to-day I moved in, and to-morrow I start to
work.”

“A position!” she cried, betraying the gladness of her surprise in all
her body, nestling closer to him, pressing his hand, smiling. “And you
never told me! What is it?”

He shook his head.

“I meant that I was going to work at my writing.” Her face fell, and he
went on hastily. “Don’t misjudge me. I am not going in this time with
any iridescent ideas. It is to be a cold, prosaic, matter-of-fact
business proposition. It is better than going to sea again, and I shall
earn more money than any position in Oakland can bring an unskilled
man.”

“You see, this vacation I have taken has given me perspective. I
haven’t been working the life out of my body, and I haven’t been
writing, at least not for publication. All I’ve done has been to love
you and to think. I’ve read some, too, but it has been part of my
thinking, and I have read principally magazines. I have generalized
about myself, and the world, my place in it, and my chance to win to a
place that will be fit for you. Also, I’ve been reading Spencer’s
‘Philosophy of Style,’ and found out a lot of what was the matter with
me—or my writing, rather; and for that matter with most of the writing
that is published every month in the magazines.”

“But the upshot of it all—of my thinking and reading and loving—is that
I am going to move to Grub Street. I shall leave masterpieces alone and
do hack-work—jokes, paragraphs, feature articles, humorous verse, and
society verse—all the rot for which there seems so much demand. Then
there are the newspaper syndicates, and the newspaper short-story
syndicates, and the syndicates for the Sunday supplements. I can go
ahead and hammer out the stuff they want, and earn the equivalent of a
good salary by it. There are free-lances, you know, who earn as much as
four or five hundred a month. I don’t care to become as they; but I’ll
earn a good living, and have plenty of time to myself, which I wouldn’t
have in any position.”

“Then, I’ll have my spare time for study and for real work. In between
the grind I’ll try my hand at masterpieces, and I’ll study and prepare
myself for the writing of masterpieces. Why, I am amazed at the
distance I have come already. When I first tried to write, I had
nothing to write about except a few paltry experiences which I neither
understood nor appreciated. But I had no thoughts. I really didn’t. I
didn’t even have the words with which to think. My experiences were so
many meaningless pictures. But as I began to add to my knowledge, and
to my vocabulary, I saw something more in my experiences than mere
pictures. I retained the pictures and I found their interpretation.
That was when I began to do good work, when I wrote ‘Adventure,’ ‘Joy,’
‘The Pot,’ ‘The Wine of Life,’ ‘The Jostling Street,’ the ‘Love-cycle,’
and the ‘Sea Lyrics.’ I shall write more like them, and better; but I
shall do it in my spare time. My feet are on the solid earth, now.
Hack-work and income first, masterpieces afterward. Just to show you, I
wrote half a dozen jokes last night for the comic weeklies; and just as
I was going to bed, the thought struck me to try my hand at a triolet—a
humorous one; and inside an hour I had written four. They ought to be
worth a dollar apiece. Four dollars right there for a few afterthoughts
on the way to bed.”

“Of course it’s all valueless, just so much dull and sordid plodding;
but it is no more dull and sordid than keeping books at sixty dollars a
month, adding up endless columns of meaningless figures until one dies.
And furthermore, the hack-work keeps me in touch with things literary
and gives me time to try bigger things.”

“But what good are these bigger things, these masterpieces?” Ruth
demanded. “You can’t sell them.”

“Oh, yes, I can,” he began; but she interrupted.

“All those you named, and which you say yourself are good—you have not
sold any of them. We can’t get married on masterpieces that won’t
sell.”

“Then we’ll get married on triolets that will sell,” he asserted
stoutly, putting his arm around her and drawing a very unresponsive
sweetheart toward him.

“Listen to this,” he went on in attempted gayety. “It’s not art, but
it’s a dollar.

“He came in
    When I was out,
To borrow some tin
Was why he came in,
    And he went without;
So I was in
    And he was out.”


The merry lilt with which he had invested the jingle was at variance
with the dejection that came into his face as he finished. He had drawn
no smile from Ruth. She was looking at him in an earnest and troubled
way.

“It may be a dollar,” she said, “but it is a jester’s dollar, the fee
of a clown. Don’t you see, Martin, the whole thing is lowering. I want
the man I love and honor to be something finer and higher than a
perpetrator of jokes and doggerel.”

“You want him to be like—say Mr. Butler?” he suggested.

“I know you don’t like Mr. Butler,” she began.

“Mr. Butler’s all right,” he interrupted. “It’s only his indigestion I
find fault with. But to save me I can’t see any difference between
writing jokes or comic verse and running a type-writer, taking
dictation, or keeping sets of books. It is all a means to an end. Your
theory is for me to begin with keeping books in order to become a
successful lawyer or man of business. Mine is to begin with hack-work
and develop into an able author.”

“There is a difference,” she insisted.

“What is it?”

“Why, your good work, what you yourself call good, you can’t sell. You
have tried, you know that,—but the editors won’t buy it.”

“Give me time, dear,” he pleaded. “The hack-work is only makeshift, and
I don’t take it seriously. Give me two years. I shall succeed in that
time, and the editors will be glad to buy my good work. I know what I
am saying; I have faith in myself. I know what I have in me; I know
what literature is, now; I know the average rot that is poured out by a
lot of little men; and I know that at the end of two years I shall be
on the highroad to success. As for business, I shall never succeed at
it. I am not in sympathy with it. It strikes me as dull, and stupid,
and mercenary, and tricky. Anyway I am not adapted for it. I’d never
get beyond a clerkship, and how could you and I be happy on the paltry
earnings of a clerk? I want the best of everything in the world for
you, and the only time when I won’t want it will be when there is
something better. And I’m going to get it, going to get all of it. The
income of a successful author makes Mr. Butler look cheap. A
‘best-seller’ will earn anywhere between fifty and a hundred thousand
dollars—sometimes more and sometimes less; but, as a rule, pretty close
to those figures.”

She remained silent; her disappointment was apparent.

“Well?” he asked.

“I had hoped and planned otherwise. I had thought, and I still think,
that the best thing for you would be to study shorthand—you already
know type-writing—and go into father’s office. You have a good mind,
and I am confident you would succeed as a lawyer.”




CHAPTER XXIII.


That Ruth had little faith in his power as a writer, did not alter her
nor diminish her in Martin’s eyes. In the breathing spell of the
vacation he had taken, he had spent many hours in self-analysis, and
thereby learned much of himself. He had discovered that he loved beauty
more than fame, and that what desire he had for fame was largely for
Ruth’s sake. It was for this reason that his desire for fame was
strong. He wanted to be great in the world’s eyes; “to make good,” as
he expressed it, in order that the woman he loved should be proud of
him and deem him worthy.

As for himself, he loved beauty passionately, and the joy of serving
her was to him sufficient wage. And more than beauty he loved Ruth. He
considered love the finest thing in the world. It was love that had
worked the revolution in him, changing him from an uncouth sailor to a
student and an artist; therefore, to him, the finest and greatest of
the three, greater than learning and artistry, was love. Already he had
discovered that his brain went beyond Ruth’s, just as it went beyond
the brains of her brothers, or the brain of her father. In spite of
every advantage of university training, and in the face of her
bachelorship of arts, his power of intellect overshadowed hers, and his
year or so of self-study and equipment gave him a mastery of the
affairs of the world and art and life that she could never hope to
possess.

All this he realized, but it did not affect his love for her, nor her
love for him. Love was too fine and noble, and he was too loyal a lover
for him to besmirch love with criticism. What did love have to do with
Ruth’s divergent views on art, right conduct, the French Revolution, or
equal suffrage? They were mental processes, but love was beyond reason;
it was superrational. He could not belittle love. He worshipped it.
Love lay on the mountain-tops beyond the valley-land of reason. It was
a sublimated condition of existence, the topmost peak of living, and it
came rarely. Thanks to the school of scientific philosophers he
favored, he knew the biological significance of love; but by a refined
process of the same scientific reasoning he reached the conclusion that
the human organism achieved its highest purpose in love, that love must
not be questioned, but must be accepted as the highest guerdon of life.
Thus, he considered the lover blessed over all creatures, and it was a
delight to him to think of “God’s own mad lover,” rising above the
things of earth, above wealth and judgment, public opinion and
applause, rising above life itself and “dying on a kiss.”

Much of this Martin had already reasoned out, and some of it he
reasoned out later. In the meantime he worked, taking no recreation
except when he went to see Ruth, and living like a Spartan. He paid two
dollars and a half a month rent for the small room he got from his
Portuguese landlady, Maria Silva, a virago and a widow, hard working
and harsher tempered, rearing her large brood of children somehow, and
drowning her sorrow and fatigue at irregular intervals in a gallon of
the thin, sour wine that she bought from the corner grocery and saloon
for fifteen cents. From detesting her and her foul tongue at first,
Martin grew to admire her as he observed the brave fight she made.
There were but four rooms in the little house—three, when Martin’s was
subtracted. One of these, the parlor, gay with an ingrain carpet and
dolorous with a funeral card and a death-picture of one of her numerous
departed babes, was kept strictly for company. The blinds were always
down, and her barefooted tribe was never permitted to enter the sacred
precinct save on state occasions. She cooked, and all ate, in the
kitchen, where she likewise washed, starched, and ironed clothes on all
days of the week except Sunday; for her income came largely from taking
in washing from her more prosperous neighbors. Remained the bedroom,
small as the one occupied by Martin, into which she and her seven
little ones crowded and slept. It was an everlasting miracle to Martin
how it was accomplished, and from her side of the thin partition he
heard nightly every detail of the going to bed, the squalls and
squabbles, the soft chattering, and the sleepy, twittering noises as of
birds. Another source of income to Maria were her cows, two of them,
which she milked night and morning and which gained a surreptitious
livelihood from vacant lots and the grass that grew on either side the
public side walks, attended always by one or more of her ragged boys,
whose watchful guardianship consisted chiefly in keeping their eyes out
for the poundmen.

In his own small room Martin lived, slept, studied, wrote, and kept
house. Before the one window, looking out on the tiny front porch, was
the kitchen table that served as desk, library, and type-writing stand.
The bed, against the rear wall, occupied two-thirds of the total space
of the room. The table was flanked on one side by a gaudy bureau,
manufactured for profit and not for service, the thin veneer of which
was shed day by day. This bureau stood in the corner, and in the
opposite corner, on the table’s other flank, was the kitchen—the
oil-stove on a dry-goods box, inside of which were dishes and cooking
utensils, a shelf on the wall for provisions, and a bucket of water on
the floor. Martin had to carry his water from the kitchen sink, there
being no tap in his room. On days when there was much steam to his
cooking, the harvest of veneer from the bureau was unusually generous.
Over the bed, hoisted by a tackle to the ceiling, was his bicycle. At
first he had tried to keep it in the basement; but the tribe of Silva,
loosening the bearings and puncturing the tires, had driven him out.
Next he attempted the tiny front porch, until a howling southeaster
drenched the wheel a night-long. Then he had retreated with it to his
room and slung it aloft.

A small closet contained his clothes and the books he had accumulated
and for which there was no room on the table or under the table. Hand
in hand with reading, he had developed the habit of making notes, and
so copiously did he make them that there would have been no existence
for him in the confined quarters had he not rigged several
clothes-lines across the room on which the notes were hung. Even so, he
was crowded until navigating the room was a difficult task. He could
not open the door without first closing the closet door, and _vice
versa_. It was impossible for him anywhere to traverse the room in a
straight line. To go from the door to the head of the bed was a zigzag
course that he was never quite able to accomplish in the dark without
collisions. Having settled the difficulty of the conflicting doors, he
had to steer sharply to the right to avoid the kitchen. Next, he
sheered to the left, to escape the foot of the bed; but this sheer, if
too generous, brought him against the corner of the table. With a
sudden twitch and lurch, he terminated the sheer and bore off to the
right along a sort of canal, one bank of which was the bed, the other
the table. When the one chair in the room was at its usual place before
the table, the canal was unnavigable. When the chair was not in use, it
reposed on top of the bed, though sometimes he sat on the chair when
cooking, reading a book while the water boiled, and even becoming
skilful enough to manage a paragraph or two while steak was frying.
Also, so small was the little corner that constituted the kitchen, he
was able, sitting down, to reach anything he needed. In fact, it was
expedient to cook sitting down; standing up, he was too often in his
own way.

In conjunction with a perfect stomach that could digest anything, he
possessed knowledge of the various foods that were at the same time
nutritious and cheap. Pea-soup was a common article in his diet, as
well as potatoes and beans, the latter large and brown and cooked in
Mexican style. Rice, cooked as American housewives never cook it and
can never learn to cook it, appeared on Martin’s table at least once a
day. Dried fruits were less expensive than fresh, and he had usually a
pot of them, cooked and ready at hand, for they took the place of
butter on his bread. Occasionally he graced his table with a piece of
round-steak, or with a soup-bone. Coffee, without cream or milk, he had
twice a day, in the evening substituting tea; but both coffee and tea
were excellently cooked.

There was need for him to be economical. His vacation had consumed
nearly all he had earned in the laundry, and he was so far from his
market that weeks must elapse before he could hope for the first
returns from his hack-work. Except at such times as he saw Ruth, or
dropped in to see his sister Gertude, he lived a recluse, in each day
accomplishing at least three days’ labor of ordinary men. He slept a
scant five hours, and only one with a constitution of iron could have
held himself down, as Martin did, day after day, to nineteen
consecutive hours of toil. He never lost a moment. On the looking-glass
were lists of definitions and pronunciations; when shaving, or
dressing, or combing his hair, he conned these lists over. Similar
lists were on the wall over the oil-stove, and they were similarly
conned while he was engaged in cooking or in washing the dishes. New
lists continually displaced the old ones. Every strange or partly
familiar word encountered in his reading was immediately jotted down,
and later, when a sufficient number had been accumulated, were typed
and pinned to the wall or looking-glass. He even carried them in his
pockets, and reviewed them at odd moments on the street, or while
waiting in butcher shop or grocery to be served.

He went farther in the matter. Reading the works of men who had
arrived, he noted every result achieved by them, and worked out the
tricks by which they had been achieved—the tricks of narrative, of
exposition, of style, the points of view, the contrasts, the epigrams;
and of all these he made lists for study. He did not ape. He sought
principles. He drew up lists of effective and fetching mannerisms, till
out of many such, culled from many writers, he was able to induce the
general principle of mannerism, and, thus equipped, to cast about for
new and original ones of his own, and to weigh and measure and appraise
them properly. In similar manner he collected lists of strong phrases,
the phrases of living language, phrases that bit like acid and scorched
like flame, or that glowed and were mellow and luscious in the midst of
the arid desert of common speech. He sought always for the principle
that lay behind and beneath. He wanted to know how the thing was done;
after that he could do it for himself. He was not content with the fair
face of beauty. He dissected beauty in his crowded little bedroom
laboratory, where cooking smells alternated with the outer bedlam of
the Silva tribe; and, having dissected and learned the anatomy of
beauty, he was nearer being able to create beauty itself.

He was so made that he could work only with understanding. He could not
work blindly, in the dark, ignorant of what he was producing and
trusting to chance and the star of his genius that the effect produced
should be right and fine. He had no patience with chance effects. He
wanted to know why and how. His was deliberate creative genius, and,
before he began a story or poem, the thing itself was already alive in
his brain, with the end in sight and the means of realizing that end in
his conscious possession. Otherwise the effort was doomed to failure.
On the other hand, he appreciated the chance effects in words and
phrases that came lightly and easily into his brain, and that later
stood all tests of beauty and power and developed tremendous and
incommunicable connotations. Before such he bowed down and marvelled,
knowing that they were beyond the deliberate creation of any man. And
no matter how much he dissected beauty in search of the principles that
underlie beauty and make beauty possible, he was aware, always, of the
innermost mystery of beauty to which he did not penetrate and to which
no man had ever penetrated. He knew full well, from his Spencer, that
man can never attain ultimate knowledge of anything, and that the
mystery of beauty was no less than that of life—nay, more—that the
fibres of beauty and life were intertwisted, and that he himself was
but a bit of the same nonunderstandable fabric, twisted of sunshine and
star-dust and wonder.

In fact, it was when filled with these thoughts that he wrote his essay
entitled “Star-dust,” in which he had his fling, not at the principles
of criticism, but at the principal critics. It was brilliant, deep,
philosophical, and deliciously touched with laughter. Also it was
promptly rejected by the magazines as often as it was submitted. But
having cleared his mind of it, he went serenely on his way. It was a
habit he developed, of incubating and maturing his thought upon a
subject, and of then rushing into the type-writer with it. That it did
not see print was a matter of small moment with him. The writing of it
was the culminating act of a long mental process, the drawing together
of scattered threads of thought and the final generalizing upon all the
data with which his mind was burdened. To write such an article was the
conscious effort by which he freed his mind and made it ready for fresh
material and problems. It was in a way akin to that common habit of men
and women troubled by real or fancied grievances, who periodically and
volubly break their long-suffering silence and “have their say” till
the last word is said.




CHAPTER XXIV.


The weeks passed. Martin ran out of money, and publishers’ checks were
far away as ever. All his important manuscripts had come back and been
started out again, and his hack-work fared no better. His little
kitchen was no longer graced with a variety of foods. Caught in the
pinch with a part sack of rice and a few pounds of dried apricots, rice
and apricots was his menu three times a day for five days hand-running.
Then he startled to realize on his credit. The Portuguese grocer, to
whom he had hitherto paid cash, called a halt when Martin’s bill
reached the magnificent total of three dollars and eighty-five cents.

“For you see,” said the grocer, “you no catcha da work, I losa da
mon’.”

And Martin could reply nothing. There was no way of explaining. It was
not true business principle to allow credit to a strong-bodied young
fellow of the working-class who was too lazy to work.

“You catcha da job, I let you have mora da grub,” the grocer assured
Martin. “No job, no grub. Thata da business.” And then, to show that it
was purely business foresight and not prejudice, “Hava da drink on da
house—good friends justa da same.”

So Martin drank, in his easy way, to show that he was good friends with
the house, and then went supperless to bed.

The fruit store, where Martin had bought his vegetables, was run by an
American whose business principles were so weak that he let Martin run
a bill of five dollars before stopping his credit. The baker stopped at
two dollars, and the butcher at four dollars. Martin added his debts
and found that he was possessed of a total credit in all the world of
fourteen dollars and eighty-five cents. He was up with his type-writer
rent, but he estimated that he could get two months’ credit on that,
which would be eight dollars. When that occurred, he would have
exhausted all possible credit.

The last purchase from the fruit store had been a sack of potatoes, and
for a week he had potatoes, and nothing but potatoes, three times a
day. An occasional dinner at Ruth’s helped to keep strength in his
body, though he found it tantalizing enough to refuse further helping
when his appetite was raging at sight of so much food spread before it.
Now and again, though afflicted with secret shame, he dropped in at his
sister’s at meal-time and ate as much as he dared—more than he dared at
the Morse table.

Day by day he worked on, and day by day the postman delivered to him
rejected manuscripts. He had no money for stamps, so the manuscripts
accumulated in a heap under the table. Came a day when for forty hours
he had not tasted food. He could not hope for a meal at Ruth’s, for she
was away to San Rafael on a two weeks’ visit; and for very shame’s sake
he could not go to his sister’s. To cap misfortune, the postman, in his
afternoon round, brought him five returned manuscripts. Then it was
that Martin wore his overcoat down into Oakland, and came back without
it, but with five dollars tinkling in his pocket. He paid a dollar each
on account to the four tradesmen, and in his kitchen fried steak and
onions, made coffee, and stewed a large pot of prunes. And having
dined, he sat down at his table-desk and completed before midnight an
essay which he entitled “The Dignity of Usury.” Having typed it out, he
flung it under the table, for there had been nothing left from the five
dollars with which to buy stamps.

Later on he pawned his watch, and still later his wheel, reducing the
amount available for food by putting stamps on all his manuscripts and
sending them out. He was disappointed with his hack-work. Nobody cared
to buy. He compared it with what he found in the newspapers, weeklies,
and cheap magazines, and decided that his was better, far better, than
the average; yet it would not sell. Then he discovered that most of the
newspapers printed a great deal of what was called “plate” stuff, and
he got the address of the association that furnished it. His own work
that he sent in was returned, along with a stereotyped slip informing
him that the staff supplied all the copy that was needed.

In one of the great juvenile periodicals he noted whole columns of
incident and anecdote. Here was a chance. His paragraphs were returned,
and though he tried repeatedly he never succeeded in placing one. Later
on, when it no longer mattered, he learned that the associate editors
and sub-editors augmented their salaries by supplying those paragraphs
themselves. The comic weeklies returned his jokes and humorous verse,
and the light society verse he wrote for the large magazines found no
abiding-place. Then there was the newspaper storiette. He knew that he
could write better ones than were published. Managing to obtain the
addresses of two newspaper syndicates, he deluged them with storiettes.
When he had written twenty and failed to place one of them, he ceased.
And yet, from day to day, he read storiettes in the dailies and
weeklies, scores and scores of storiettes, not one of which would
compare with his. In his despondency, he concluded that he had no
judgment whatever, that he was hypnotized by what he wrote, and that he
was a self-deluded pretender.

The inhuman editorial machine ran smoothly as ever. He folded the
stamps in with his manuscript, dropped it into the letter-box, and from
three weeks to a month afterward the postman came up the steps and
handed him the manuscript. Surely there were no live, warm editors at
the other end. It was all wheels and cogs and oil-cups—a clever
mechanism operated by automatons. He reached stages of despair wherein
he doubted if editors existed at all. He had never received a sign of
the existence of one, and from absence of judgment in rejecting all he
wrote it seemed plausible that editors were myths, manufactured and
maintained by office boys, typesetters, and pressmen.

The hours he spent with Ruth were the only happy ones he had, and they
were not all happy. He was afflicted always with a gnawing
restlessness, more tantalizing than in the old days before he possessed
her love; for now that he did possess her love, the possession of her
was far away as ever. He had asked for two years; time was flying, and
he was achieving nothing. Again, he was always conscious of the fact
that she did not approve what he was doing. She did not say so
directly. Yet indirectly she let him understand it as clearly and
definitely as she could have spoken it. It was not resentment with her,
but disapproval; though less sweet-natured women might have resented
where she was no more than disappointed. Her disappointment lay in that
this man she had taken to mould, refused to be moulded. To a certain
extent she had found his clay plastic, then it had developed
stubbornness, declining to be shaped in the image of her father or of
Mr. Butler.

What was great and strong in him, she missed, or, worse yet,
misunderstood. This man, whose clay was so plastic that he could live
in any number of pigeonholes of human existence, she thought wilful and
most obstinate because she could not shape him to live in her
pigeonhole, which was the only one she knew. She could not follow the
flights of his mind, and when his brain got beyond her, she deemed him
erratic. Nobody else’s brain ever got beyond her. She could always
follow her father and mother, her brothers and Olney; wherefore, when
she could not follow Martin, she believed the fault lay with him. It
was the old tragedy of insularity trying to serve as mentor to the
universal.

“You worship at the shrine of the established,” he told her once, in a
discussion they had over Praps and Vanderwater. “I grant that as
authorities to quote they are most excellent—the two foremost literary
critics in the United States. Every school teacher in the land looks up
to Vanderwater as the Dean of American criticism. Yet I read his stuff,
and it seems to me the perfection of the felicitous expression of the
inane. Why, he is no more than a ponderous bromide, thanks to Gelett
Burgess. And Praps is no better. His ‘Hemlock Mosses,’ for instance is
beautifully written. Not a comma is out of place; and the tone—ah!—is
lofty, so lofty. He is the best-paid critic in the United States.
Though, Heaven forbid! he’s not a critic at all. They do criticism
better in England.

“But the point is, they sound the popular note, and they sound it so
beautifully and morally and contentedly. Their reviews remind me of a
British Sunday. They are the popular mouthpieces. They back up your
professors of English, and your professors of English back them up. And
there isn’t an original idea in any of their skulls. They know only the
established,—in fact, they are the established. They are weak minded,
and the established impresses itself upon them as easily as the name of
the brewery is impressed on a beer bottle. And their function is to
catch all the young fellows attending the university, to drive out of
their minds any glimmering originality that may chance to be there, and
to put upon them the stamp of the established.”

“I think I am nearer the truth,” she replied, “when I stand by the
established, than you are, raging around like an iconoclastic South Sea
Islander.”

“It was the missionary who did the image breaking,” he laughed. “And
unfortunately, all the missionaries are off among the heathen, so there
are none left at home to break those old images, Mr. Vanderwater and
Mr. Praps.”

“And the college professors, as well,” she added.

He shook his head emphatically. “No; the science professors should
live. They’re really great. But it would be a good deed to break the
heads of nine-tenths of the English professors—little,
microscopic-minded parrots!”

Which was rather severe on the professors, but which to Ruth was
blasphemy. She could not help but measure the professors, neat,
scholarly, in fitting clothes, speaking in well-modulated voices,
breathing of culture and refinement, with this almost indescribable
young fellow whom somehow she loved, whose clothes never would fit him,
whose heavy muscles told of damning toil, who grew excited when he
talked, substituting abuse for calm statement and passionate utterance
for cool self-possession. They at least earned good salaries and
were—yes, she compelled herself to face it—were gentlemen; while he
could not earn a penny, and he was not as they.

She did not weigh Martin’s words nor judge his argument by them. Her
conclusion that his argument was wrong was reached—unconsciously, it is
true—by a comparison of externals. They, the professors, were right in
their literary judgments because they were successes. Martin’s literary
judgments were wrong because he could not sell his wares. To use his
own phrase, they made good, and he did not make good. And besides, it
did not seem reasonable that he should be right—he who had stood, so
short a time before, in that same living room, blushing and awkward,
acknowledging his introduction, looking fearfully about him at the
bric-a-brac his swinging shoulders threatened to break, asking how long
since Swinburne died, and boastfully announcing that he had read
“Excelsior” and the “Psalm of Life.”

Unwittingly, Ruth herself proved his point that she worshipped the
established. Martin followed the processes of her thoughts, but forbore
to go farther. He did not love her for what she thought of Praps and
Vanderwater and English professors, and he was coming to realize, with
increasing conviction, that he possessed brain-areas and stretches of
knowledge which she could never comprehend nor know existed.

In music she thought him unreasonable, and in the matter of opera not
only unreasonable but wilfully perverse.

“How did you like it?” she asked him one night, on the way home from
the opera.

It was a night when he had taken her at the expense of a month’s rigid
economizing on food. After vainly waiting for him to speak about it,
herself still tremulous and stirred by what she had just seen and
heard, she had asked the question.

“I liked the overture,” was his answer. “It was splendid.”

“Yes, but the opera itself?”

“That was splendid too; that is, the orchestra was, though I’d have
enjoyed it more if those jumping-jacks had kept quiet or gone off the
stage.”

Ruth was aghast.

“You don’t mean Tetralani or Barillo?” she queried.

“All of them—the whole kit and crew.”

“But they are great artists,” she protested.

“They spoiled the music just the same, with their antics and
unrealities.”

“But don’t you like Barillo’s voice?” Ruth asked. “He is next to
Caruso, they say.”

“Of course I liked him, and I liked Tetralani even better. Her voice is
exquisite—or at least I think so.”

“But, but—” Ruth stammered. “I don’t know what you mean, then. You
admire their voices, yet say they spoiled the music.”

“Precisely that. I’d give anything to hear them in concert, and I’d
give even a bit more not to hear them when the orchestra is playing.
I’m afraid I am a hopeless realist. Great singers are not great actors.
To hear Barillo sing a love passage with the voice of an angel, and to
hear Tetralani reply like another angel, and to hear it all accompanied
by a perfect orgy of glowing and colorful music—is ravishing, most
ravishing. I do not admit it. I assert it. But the whole effect is
spoiled when I look at them—at Tetralani, five feet ten in her stocking
feet and weighing a hundred and ninety pounds, and at Barillo, a scant
five feet four, greasy-featured, with the chest of a squat, undersized
blacksmith, and at the pair of them, attitudinizing, clasping their
breasts, flinging their arms in the air like demented creatures in an
asylum; and when I am expected to accept all this as the faithful
illusion of a love-scene between a slender and beautiful princess and a
handsome, romantic, young prince—why, I can’t accept it, that’s all.
It’s rot; it’s absurd; it’s unreal. That’s what’s the matter with it.
It’s not real. Don’t tell me that anybody in this world ever made love
that way. Why, if I’d made love to you in such fashion, you’d have
boxed my ears.”

“But you misunderstand,” Ruth protested. “Every form of art has its
limitations.” (She was busy recalling a lecture she had heard at the
university on the conventions of the arts.) “In painting there are only
two dimensions to the canvas, yet you accept the illusion of three
dimensions which the art of a painter enables him to throw into the
canvas. In writing, again, the author must be omnipotent. You accept as
perfectly legitimate the author’s account of the secret thoughts of the
heroine, and yet all the time you know that the heroine was alone when
thinking these thoughts, and that neither the author nor any one else
was capable of hearing them. And so with the stage, with sculpture,
with opera, with every art form. Certain irreconcilable things must be
accepted.”

“Yes, I understood that,” Martin answered. “All the arts have their
conventions.” (Ruth was surprised at his use of the word. It was as if
he had studied at the university himself, instead of being ill-equipped
from browsing at haphazard through the books in the library.) “But even
the conventions must be real. Trees, painted on flat cardboard and
stuck up on each side of the stage, we accept as a forest. It is a real
enough convention. But, on the other hand, we would not accept a sea
scene as a forest. We can’t do it. It violates our senses. Nor would
you, or, rather, should you, accept the ravings and writhings and
agonized contortions of those two lunatics to-night as a convincing
portrayal of love.”

“But you don’t hold yourself superior to all the judges of music?” she
protested.

“No, no, not for a moment. I merely maintain my right as an individual.
I have just been telling you what I think, in order to explain why the
elephantine gambols of Madame Tetralani spoil the orchestra for me. The
world’s judges of music may all be right. But I am I, and I won’t
subordinate my taste to the unanimous judgment of mankind. If I don’t
like a thing, I don’t like it, that’s all; and there is no reason under
the sun why I should ape a liking for it just because the majority of
my fellow-creatures like it, or make believe they like it. I can’t
follow the fashions in the things I like or dislike.”

“But music, you know, is a matter of training,” Ruth argued; “and opera
is even more a matter of training. May it not be—”

“That I am not trained in opera?” he dashed in.

She nodded.

“The very thing,” he agreed. “And I consider I am fortunate in not
having been caught when I was young. If I had, I could have wept
sentimental tears to-night, and the clownish antics of that precious
pair would have but enhanced the beauty of their voices and the beauty
of the accompanying orchestra. You are right. It’s mostly a matter of
training. And I am too old, now. I must have the real or nothing. An
illusion that won’t convince is a palpable lie, and that’s what grand
opera is to me when little Barillo throws a fit, clutches mighty
Tetralani in his arms (also in a fit), and tells her how passionately
he adores her.”

Again Ruth measured his thoughts by comparison of externals and in
accordance with her belief in the established. Who was he that he
should be right and all the cultured world wrong? His words and
thoughts made no impression upon her. She was too firmly intrenched in
the established to have any sympathy with revolutionary ideas. She had
always been used to music, and she had enjoyed opera ever since she was
a child, and all her world had enjoyed it, too. Then by what right did
Martin Eden emerge, as he had so recently emerged, from his rag-time
and working-class songs, and pass judgment on the world’s music? She
was vexed with him, and as she walked beside him she had a vague
feeling of outrage. At the best, in her most charitable frame of mind,
she considered the statement of his views to be a caprice, an erratic
and uncalled-for prank. But when he took her in his arms at the door
and kissed her good night in tender lover-fashion, she forgot
everything in the outrush of her own love to him. And later, on a
sleepless pillow, she puzzled, as she had often puzzled of late, as to
how it was that she loved so strange a man, and loved him despite the
disapproval of her people.

And next day Martin Eden cast hack-work aside, and at white heat
hammered out an essay to which he gave the title, “The Philosophy of
Illusion.” A stamp started it on its travels, but it was destined to
receive many stamps and to be started on many travels in the months
that followed.




CHAPTER XXV.


Maria Silva was poor, and all the ways of poverty were clear to her.
Poverty, to Ruth, was a word signifying a not-nice condition of
existence. That was her total knowledge on the subject. She knew Martin
was poor, and his condition she associated in her mind with the boyhood
of Abraham Lincoln, of Mr. Butler, and of other men who had become
successes. Also, while aware that poverty was anything but delectable,
she had a comfortable middle-class feeling that poverty was salutary,
that it was a sharp spur that urged on to success all men who were not
degraded and hopeless drudges. So that her knowledge that Martin was so
poor that he had pawned his watch and overcoat did not disturb her. She
even considered it the hopeful side of the situation, believing that
sooner or later it would arouse him and compel him to abandon his
writing.

Ruth never read hunger in Martin’s face, which had grown lean and had
enlarged the slight hollows in the cheeks. In fact, she marked the
change in his face with satisfaction. It seemed to refine him, to
remove from him much of the dross of flesh and the too animal-like
vigor that lured her while she detested it. Sometimes, when with her,
she noted an unusual brightness in his eyes, and she admired it, for it
made him appear more the poet and the scholar—the things he would have
liked to be and which she would have liked him to be. But Maria Silva
read a different tale in the hollow cheeks and the burning eyes, and
she noted the changes in them from day to day, by them following the
ebb and flow of his fortunes. She saw him leave the house with his
overcoat and return without it, though the day was chill and raw, and
promptly she saw his cheeks fill out slightly and the fire of hunger
leave his eyes. In the same way she had seen his wheel and watch go,
and after each event she had seen his vigor bloom again.

Likewise she watched his toils, and knew the measure of the midnight
oil he burned. Work! She knew that he outdid her, though his work was
of a different order. And she was surprised to behold that the less
food he had, the harder he worked. On occasion, in a casual sort of
way, when she thought hunger pinched hardest, she would send him in a
loaf of new baking, awkwardly covering the act with banter to the
effect that it was better than he could bake. And again, she would send
one of her toddlers in to him with a great pitcher of hot soup,
debating inwardly the while whether she was justified in taking it from
the mouths of her own flesh and blood. Nor was Martin ungrateful,
knowing as he did the lives of the poor, and that if ever in the world
there was charity, this was it.

On a day when she had filled her brood with what was left in the house,
Maria invested her last fifteen cents in a gallon of cheap wine.
Martin, coming into her kitchen to fetch water, was invited to sit down
and drink. He drank her very-good health, and in return she drank his.
Then she drank to prosperity in his undertakings, and he drank to the
hope that James Grant would show up and pay her for his washing. James
Grant was a journeymen carpenter who did not always pay his bills and
who owed Maria three dollars.

Both Maria and Martin drank the sour new wine on empty stomachs, and it
went swiftly to their heads. Utterly differentiated creatures that they
were, they were lonely in their misery, and though the misery was
tacitly ignored, it was the bond that drew them together. Maria was
amazed to learn that he had been in the Azores, where she had lived
until she was eleven. She was doubly amazed that he had been in the
Hawaiian Islands, whither she had migrated from the Azores with her
people. But her amazement passed all bounds when he told her he had
been on Maui, the particular island whereon she had attained womanhood
and married. Kahului, where she had first met her husband,—he, Martin,
had been there twice! Yes, she remembered the sugar steamers, and he
had been on them—well, well, it was a small world. And Wailuku! That
place, too! Did he know the head-luna of the plantation? Yes, and had
had a couple of drinks with him.

And so they reminiscenced and drowned their hunger in the raw, sour
wine. To Martin the future did not seem so dim. Success trembled just
before him. He was on the verge of clasping it. Then he studied the
deep-lined face of the toil-worn woman before him, remembered her soups
and loaves of new baking, and felt spring up in him the warmest
gratitude and philanthropy.

“Maria,” he exclaimed suddenly. “What would you like to have?”

She looked at him, bepuzzled.

“What would you like to have now, right now, if you could get it?”

“Shoe alla da roun’ for da childs—seven pairs da shoe.”

“You shall have them,” he announced, while she nodded her head gravely.
“But I mean a big wish, something big that you want.”

Her eyes sparkled good-naturedly. He was choosing to make fun with her,
Maria, with whom few made fun these days.

“Think hard,” he cautioned, just as she was opening her mouth to speak.

“Alla right,” she answered. “I thinka da hard. I lika da house, dis
house—all mine, no paya da rent, seven dollar da month.”

“You shall have it,” he granted, “and in a short time. Now wish the
great wish. Make believe I am God, and I say to you anything you want
you can have. Then you wish that thing, and I listen.”

Maria considered solemnly for a space.

“You no ’fraid?” she asked warningly.

“No, no,” he laughed, “I’m not afraid. Go ahead.”

“Most verra big,” she warned again.

“All right. Fire away.”

“Well, den—” She drew a big breath like a child, as she voiced to the
uttermost all she cared to demand of life. “I lika da have one milka
ranch—good milka ranch. Plenty cow, plenty land, plenty grass. I lika
da have near San Le-an; my sister liva dere. I sella da milk in
Oakland. I maka da plentee mon. Joe an’ Nick no runna da cow. Dey go-a
to school. Bimeby maka da good engineer, worka da railroad. Yes, I lika
da milka ranch.”

She paused and regarded Martin with twinkling eyes.

“You shall have it,” he answered promptly.

She nodded her head and touched her lips courteously to the wine-glass
and to the giver of the gift she knew would never be given. His heart
was right, and in her own heart she appreciated his intention as much
as if the gift had gone with it.

“No, Maria,” he went on; “Nick and Joe won’t have to peddle milk, and
all the kids can go to school and wear shoes the whole year round. It
will be a first-class milk ranch—everything complete. There will be a
house to live in and a stable for the horses, and cow-barns, of course.
There will be chickens, pigs, vegetables, fruit trees, and everything
like that; and there will be enough cows to pay for a hired man or two.
Then you won’t have anything to do but take care of the children. For
that matter, if you find a good man, you can marry and take it easy
while he runs the ranch.”

And from such largess, dispensed from his future, Martin turned and
took his one good suit of clothes to the pawnshop. His plight was
desperate for him to do this, for it cut him off from Ruth. He had no
second-best suit that was presentable, and though he could go to the
butcher and the baker, and even on occasion to his sister’s, it was
beyond all daring to dream of entering the Morse home so disreputably
apparelled.

He toiled on, miserable and well-nigh hopeless. It began to appear to
him that the second battle was lost and that he would have to go to
work. In doing this he would satisfy everybody—the grocer, his sister,
Ruth, and even Maria, to whom he owed a month’s room rent. He was two
months behind with his type-writer, and the agency was clamoring for
payment or for the return of the machine. In desperation, all but ready
to surrender, to make a truce with fate until he could get a fresh
start, he took the civil service examinations for the Railway Mail. To
his surprise, he passed first. The job was assured, though when the
call would come to enter upon his duties nobody knew.

It was at this time, at the lowest ebb, that the smooth-running
editorial machine broke down. A cog must have slipped or an oil-cup run
dry, for the postman brought him one morning a short, thin envelope.
Martin glanced at the upper left-hand corner and read the name and
address of the _Transcontinental Monthly_. His heart gave a great leap,
and he suddenly felt faint, the sinking feeling accompanied by a
strange trembling of the knees. He staggered into his room and sat down
on the bed, the envelope still unopened, and in that moment came
understanding to him how people suddenly fall dead upon receipt of
extraordinarily good news.

Of course this was good news. There was no manuscript in that thin
envelope, therefore it was an acceptance. He knew the story in the
hands of the _Transcontinental_. It was “The Ring of Bells,” one of his
horror stories, and it was an even five thousand words. And, since
first-class magazines always paid on acceptance, there was a check
inside. Two cents a word—twenty dollars a thousand; the check must be a
hundred dollars. One hundred dollars! As he tore the envelope open,
every item of all his debts surged in his brain—$3.85 to the grocer;
butcher $4.00 flat; baker, $2.00; fruit store, $5.00; total, $14.85.
Then there was room rent, $2.50; another month in advance, $2.50; two
months’ type-writer, $8.00; a month in advance, $4.00; total, $31.85.
And finally to be added, his pledges, plus interest, with the
pawnbroker—watch, $5.50; overcoat, $5.50; wheel, $7.75; suit of
clothes, $5.50 (60 % interest, but what did it matter?)—grand total,
$56.10. He saw, as if visible in the air before him, in illuminated
figures, the whole sum, and the subtraction that followed and that gave
a remainder of $43.90. When he had squared every debt, redeemed every
pledge, he would still have jingling in his pockets a princely $43.90.
And on top of that he would have a month’s rent paid in advance on the
type-writer and on the room.

By this time he had drawn the single sheet of type-written letter out
and spread it open. There was no check. He peered into the envelope,
held it to the light, but could not trust his eyes, and in trembling
haste tore the envelope apart. There was no check. He read the letter,
skimming it line by line, dashing through the editor’s praise of his
story to the meat of the letter, the statement why the check had not
been sent. He found no such statement, but he did find that which made
him suddenly wilt. The letter slid from his hand. His eyes went
lack-lustre, and he lay back on the pillow, pulling the blanket about
him and up to his chin.

Five dollars for “The Ring of Bells”—five dollars for five thousand
words! Instead of two cents a word, ten words for a cent! And the
editor had praised it, too. And he would receive the check when the
story was published. Then it was all poppycock, two cents a word for
minimum rate and payment upon acceptance. It was a lie, and it had led
him astray. He would never have attempted to write had he known that.
He would have gone to work—to work for Ruth. He went back to the day he
first attempted to write, and was appalled at the enormous waste of
time—and all for ten words for a cent. And the other high rewards of
writers, that he had read about, must be lies, too. His second-hand
ideas of authorship were wrong, for here was the proof of it.

The _Transcontinental_ sold for twenty-five cents, and its dignified
and artistic cover proclaimed it as among the first-class magazines. It
was a staid, respectable magazine, and it had been published
continuously since long before he was born. Why, on the outside cover
were printed every month the words of one of the world’s great writers,
words proclaiming the inspired mission of the _Transcontinental_ by a
star of literature whose first coruscations had appeared inside those
self-same covers. And the high and lofty, heaven-inspired
_Transcontinental_ paid five dollars for five thousand words! The great
writer had recently died in a foreign land—in dire poverty, Martin
remembered, which was not to be wondered at, considering the
magnificent pay authors receive.

Well, he had taken the bait, the newspaper lies about writers and their
pay, and he had wasted two years over it. But he would disgorge the
bait now. Not another line would he ever write. He would do what Ruth
wanted him to do, what everybody wanted him to do—get a job. The
thought of going to work reminded him of Joe—Joe, tramping through the
land of nothing-to-do. Martin heaved a great sigh of envy. The reaction
of nineteen hours a day for many days was strong upon him. But then,
Joe was not in love, had none of the responsibilities of love, and he
could afford to loaf through the land of nothing-to-do. He, Martin, had
something to work for, and go to work he would. He would start out
early next morning to hunt a job. And he would let Ruth know, too, that
he had mended his ways and was willing to go into her father’s office.

Five dollars for five thousand words, ten words for a cent, the market
price for art. The disappointment of it, the lie of it, the infamy of
it, were uppermost in his thoughts; and under his closed eyelids, in
fiery figures, burned the “$3.85” he owed the grocer. He shivered, and
was aware of an aching in his bones. The small of his back ached
especially. His head ached, the top of it ached, the back of it ached,
the brains inside of it ached and seemed to be swelling, while the ache
over his brows was intolerable. And beneath the brows, planted under
his lids, was the merciless “$3.85.” He opened his eyes to escape it,
but the white light of the room seemed to sear the balls and forced him
to close his eyes, when the “$3.85” confronted him again.

Five dollars for five thousand words, ten words for a cent—that
particular thought took up its residence in his brain, and he could no
more escape it than he could the “$3.85” under his eyelids. A change
seemed to come over the latter, and he watched curiously, till “$2.00”
burned in its stead. Ah, he thought, that was the baker. The next sum
that appeared was “$2.50.